docs/docs/manage/logging.md, before:

# Logging

MCP Gateway provides comprehensive file-based logging with automatic rotation, dual-format output (JSON for files, text for console), and centralized logging service integration. This guide shows how to configure log levels, formats, destinations, and file management.

---

## 🧾 Log Structure

MCP Gateway uses dual-format logging:

- **File logs**: Structured JSON format for machine processing and log aggregation
- **Console logs**: Human-readable text format for development and debugging

### JSON Format (File Output)
```json
{
  "asctime": "2025-01-09 17:30:15,123",
  "name": "mcpgateway.gateway_service",
  "levelname": "INFO",
  "message": "Registered gateway: peer-gateway-1"
}
```

#### HTTP Access Logs (JSON)
```json
{
  "asctime": "2025-01-09 17:30:22,456",
  "name": "uvicorn.access",
  "levelname": "INFO",
  "message": "127.0.0.1:43926 - \"GET /version HTTP/1.1\" 401"
}
```

### Text Format (Console Output)
```
2025-01-09 17:30:15,123 - mcpgateway.gateway_service - INFO - Registered gateway: peer-gateway-1
```

---

## 🔧 Configuring Logs

MCP Gateway provides flexible logging with **stdout/stderr by default** and **optional file logging**. You can control logging behavior using `.env` settings or environment variables:

| Variable                | Description                        | Default           | Example                     |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ----------------- | --------------------------- |
| `LOG_LEVEL`             | Minimum log level                  | `INFO`            | `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARNING`  |
| `LOG_FORMAT`            | Console log format                 | `json`            | `json` or `text`            |
| `LOG_TO_FILE`           | **Enable file logging**            | **`false`**       | **`true`, `false`**         |
| `LOG_FILE`              | Log filename (when enabled)        | `null`            | `gateway.log`               |
| `LOG_FOLDER`            | Directory for log files            | `null`            | `/var/log/mcpgateway`       |
| `LOG_FILEMODE`          | File write mode                    | `a+`              | `a+` (append), `w` (overwrite) |
| `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED`  | **Enable log file rotation**       | **`false`**       | **`true`, `false`**         |
| `LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB`       | Max file size before rotation (MB) | `1`               | `10`, `50`, `100`           |
| `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT`      | Number of backup files to keep     | `5`               | `3`, `10`, `0` (no backups) |
| `STRUCTURED_LOGGING_DATABASE_ENABLED` | **Persist logs to database** | **`false`** | **`true`, `false`** |
| `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED` | **Enable audit trail logging for compliance** | **`false`** | **`true`, `false`** |
| `SECURITY_LOGGING_ENABLED` | **Enable security event logging** | **`false`** | **`true`, `false`** |
| `SECURITY_LOGGING_LEVEL` | Security logging verbosity level | `failures_only` | `all`, `failures_only`, `high_severity` |

### Logging Behavior

- **Default**: Logs **only to stdout/stderr** with human-readable text format (recommended for containers)
- **File Logging**: When `LOG_TO_FILE=true`, logs to **both** file (JSON format) and console (text format)
- **Log Rotation**: When `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true`, files rotate at `LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB` with `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT` backup files
- **No Rotation**: When `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=false`, files grow indefinitely (append mode)
- **Directory Creation**: Log folder is created automatically if it doesn't exist
- **Dual Output**: JSON logs to file, text logs to console simultaneously (when file logging enabled)

### Example Configurations

```bash
# Default: stdout/stderr only (recommended for containers)
LOG_LEVEL=INFO
# No additional config needed - logs to stdout/stderr only

# Optional: Enable file logging (no rotation)
LOG_TO_FILE=true
LOG_FOLDER=/var/log/mcpgateway
LOG_FILE=gateway.log
LOG_FILEMODE=a+

# Production with file rotation
LOG_TO_FILE=true
LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true
LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB=10
LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=7
LOG_FOLDER=/var/log/mcpgateway
LOG_FILE=gateway.log

# Development with file logging and rotation
LOG_TO_FILE=true
LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true
LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB=1
LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=3
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
LOG_FOLDER=./logs
LOG_FILE=debug.log
LOG_FORMAT=text
```

---

## 📋 Audit Trail Logging

Audit trail logging records all CRUD operations (create, read, update, delete) on resources for compliance purposes. **This is disabled by default for performance**.

### Configuration

```bash
# Audit trail logging - disabled by default for performance
AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=false
```

### What Gets Logged

When enabled, all API operations are recorded in the `audit_trails` table:

- **Create** - New tools, servers, gateways, resources, prompts
- **Read** - View operations on any resource
- **Update** - Modifications with before/after values
- **Delete** - Deletions with snapshot of deleted data

### Use Cases

| Scenario | Recommendation |
|----------|----------------|
| Production compliance (SOC2, HIPAA, GDPR) | `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=true` |
| Load testing / benchmarking | `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=false` |
| Development / debugging | `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=false` |

!!! warning "Performance Impact"
    Enabling audit trails causes a **database write on every API request**. During load testing with 2000 concurrent users, this can generate ~1 million rows in a few hours, consuming 788+ MB of database space and causing PostgreSQL memory pressure. **Always disable for load testing.**

### Audit Trails Table

Query audit trails via the API: `GET /api/logs/audit-trails`

---

## 🔐 Security Event Logging

Security event logging records authentication attempts, authorization failures, and other security-relevant events to the database. **This is disabled by default for performance**.

### Configuration

```bash
# Security event logging - disabled by default for performance
SECURITY_LOGGING_ENABLED=false

# Security logging level controls what gets logged
SECURITY_LOGGING_LEVEL=failures_only  # all, failures_only, high_severity
```

### Logging Levels

| Level | Description | Use Case |
|-------|-------------|----------|
| `all` | Log all events including successful authentications | Debugging, compliance auditing (high DB load) |
| `failures_only` | Log only authentication/authorization failures | Production monitoring without excessive writes |
| `high_severity` | Log only high/critical severity events | Minimal logging for high-traffic environments |

!!! warning "Performance Impact"
    Setting `SECURITY_LOGGING_LEVEL=all` logs **every authenticated request** to the database. During load testing, this can generate 300+ database writes per second, causing significant performance degradation. Use `failures_only` or `high_severity` in production.

### Security Events Table

When enabled, events are stored in the `security_events` table:

- Authentication success/failure
- Authorization denials
- Rate limiting triggers
- Suspicious activity detection

Query security events via the API: `GET /api/logs/security-events`

---

## 📂 Log File Management

**Note**: This section applies only when file logging is enabled with `LOG_TO_FILE=true`. By default, MCP Gateway logs only to stdout/stderr.

### Viewing Log Files

```bash
# View current log file
cat logs/mcpgateway.log

# Follow log file in real-time
tail -f logs/mcpgateway.log

# View with JSON formatting (requires jq)
tail -f logs/mcpgateway.log | jq '.'

# Search logs for specific patterns
grep "ERROR" logs/mcpgateway.log
grep "gateway_service" logs/*.log
```

### Log Rotation

**Log rotation is optional** and only applies when both file logging and rotation are enabled:

- `LOG_TO_FILE=true` - Enable file logging
- `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true` - Enable rotation

When enabled, files automatically rotate based on the configured size limit (`LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB`):

```
logs/
├── mcpgateway.log      (current, active log)
├── mcpgateway.log.1    (most recent backup)
├── mcpgateway.log.2    (second backup)
├── mcpgateway.log.3    (third backup)
└── ...                 (up to LOG_BACKUP_COUNT backups)
```

**Configuration Options:**

- `LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB=10` - Rotate when file reaches 10MB
- `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=3` - Keep 3 backup files (plus current file = 4 total)
- `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=0` - No backup files (only current file kept)

**Without Rotation:**

- When `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=false`, files grow indefinitely
- Use external log management tools for cleanup if needed

### Cleanup and Maintenance

```bash
# Archive old logs (optional)
tar -czf mcpgateway-logs-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz logs/mcpgateway.log.*

# Clear all log files (be careful!)
rm logs/mcpgateway.log*

# Check log file sizes
du -sh logs/*
```

---

## 🖥️ Admin UI Log Viewer

MCP Gateway includes a built-in log viewer in the Admin UI that provides real-time monitoring, filtering, and export capabilities without requiring direct file access.

### Enabling the Log Viewer

The log viewer is automatically available when the Admin UI is enabled:

```bash
# Enable Admin UI (includes log viewer)
MCPGATEWAY_UI_ENABLED=true

# Configure in-memory log buffer size (default: 1MB)
LOG_BUFFER_SIZE_MB=2  # Increase for more log history
```

### Features

#### Real-Time Monitoring
- **Live streaming** via Server-Sent Events (SSE)
- **Automatic updates** as new logs are generated
- **Visual indicators** with pulse animation for new entries
- **Color-coded severity levels**:

  - Debug: Gray
  - Info: Blue
  - Warning: Yellow
  - Error: Red
  - Critical: Purple

#### Filtering & Search
- **Filter by log level**: Debug, Info, Warning, Error, Critical
- **Filter by entity type**: Tool, Resource, Server, Gateway
- **Full-text search**: Search within log messages
- **Time range filtering**: Filter by date/time range
- **Request ID tracing**: Track logs for specific requests

#### Export Capabilities
- **Export to JSON**: Download filtered logs as JSON file
- **Export to CSV**: Download filtered logs as CSV file
- **Download log files**: Direct access to rotated log files (if file logging enabled)

### Accessing the Log Viewer

1. Navigate to the Admin UI: `http://localhost:4444/admin`
2. Click the **"Logs"** tab in the navigation
3. Use the filter controls to refine your view:

   - Select entity type from dropdown
   - Choose minimum log level
   - Enter search terms
   - Set pagination options

### API Endpoints

The log viewer also exposes REST API endpoints for programmatic access:

```bash
# Get filtered logs
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs?level=error&limit=50"

# Stream logs in real-time (SSE)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs/stream"

# Export logs as JSON
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs/export?format=json" \
  -o logs.json

# List available log files
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs/file"
```

### Buffer Management

The log viewer uses an in-memory circular buffer with configurable size:

- **Default size**: 1MB (approximately 2000-5000 log entries)
- **Size-based eviction**: Oldest logs automatically removed when buffer is full
- **No persistence**: Buffer is cleared on server restart
- **Performance**: Minimal memory overhead with O(1) operations

### Configuration Options

| Variable              | Description                          | Default | Example |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------ | ------- | ------- |
| `LOG_BUFFER_SIZE_MB` | In-memory buffer size for UI viewer | `1`     | `2`, `5`, `10` |

### Best Practices

1. **Adjust buffer size** based on your monitoring needs:

   - Development: 1-2MB is usually sufficient
   - Production: Consider 5-10MB for longer history

2. **Use filters** to focus on relevant logs:

   - Filter by error level during troubleshooting
   - Filter by entity when debugging specific components

3. **Export regularly** if you need to preserve logs:

   - The buffer is in-memory only and clears on restart
   - Export important logs to JSON/CSV for archival

4. **Combine with file logging** for persistence:

   - UI viewer for real-time monitoring
   - File logs for long-term storage and analysis

---

## 📡 Streaming Logs (Containers)

```bash
docker logs -f mcpgateway
# or with Podman
podman logs -f mcpgateway
```

---

## 📤 Shipping Logs to External Services

MCP Gateway can write to stdout or a file. To forward logs to services like:

* **ELK (Elastic Stack)**
* **LogDNA / IBM Log Analysis**
* **Datadog**
* **Fluentd / Loki**

You can:

* Mount log files to a sidecar container
* Use a logging agent (e.g., Filebeat)
* Pipe logs to syslog-compatible services

---

## 🗄️ Database Log Persistence

MCP Gateway can optionally persist structured logs to the database for advanced search, request tracing, and performance metrics. **This feature is disabled by default for performance reasons.**

### Enabling Database Logging

```bash
# Enable database persistence for logs
STRUCTURED_LOGGING_DATABASE_ENABLED=true
```

### Features When Enabled

When `STRUCTURED_LOGGING_DATABASE_ENABLED=true`, you get:

| Feature | API Endpoint | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| **Log Search** | `POST /api/logs/search` | Search logs by level, component, user, time range, correlation ID |
| **Request Tracing** | `GET /api/logs/trace/{correlation_id}` | View all logs, security events, and audit trails for a single request |
| **Performance Metrics** | `GET /api/logs/performance-metrics` | Aggregated p50/p95/p99 latencies, error rates by component |
| **Security Events** | `GET /api/logs/security-events` | Authentication failures, threat detection, security audit |
| **Audit Trails** | `GET /api/logs/audit-trails` | CRUD operations, data access compliance logging |

### Example: Search Logs via API

```bash
# Search for error logs in the last hour
curl -X POST "http://localhost:4444/api/logs/search" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "level": ["ERROR", "CRITICAL"],
    "limit": 50,
    "sort_order": "desc"
  }'

# Trace all logs for a specific request
curl "http://localhost:4444/api/logs/trace/abc-123-correlation-id" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```

### Performance Considerations

!!! warning "Performance Impact"
    When enabled, **each log entry triggers a synchronous database write**. This can significantly impact performance under high load.

**Recommendations:**

- **Disable in production** if you use an external log aggregator (ELK, Datadog, Splunk)
- **Enable for development** or low-traffic deployments where built-in search is useful
- **Consider external logging** for high-throughput production environments

### When to Enable vs Disable

| Scenario | Recommendation |
|----------|----------------|
| Development/testing | ✅ Enable - useful for debugging |
| Low-traffic production | ✅ Enable - built-in observability |
| High-traffic production | ❌ Disable - use external aggregator |
| Using ELK/Datadog/Splunk | ❌ Disable - redundant storage |
| Need request tracing | ✅ Enable - correlation ID tracing |
| Performance-critical | ❌ Disable - avoid DB I/O overhead |

---

## 🧪 Debug Mode

For development and troubleshooting, enable verbose logging:

```env
# Enable debug logging
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
LOG_FORMAT=text
LOG_FOLDER=./debug-logs
LOG_FILE=debug.log
DEBUG=true
```

### Debug Features

- **HTTP Access Logs**: All HTTP requests with IP, method, path, status code (via `uvicorn.access`)
- **HTTP Error Logs**: Server errors, invalid requests (via `uvicorn.error`)
- **Internal Service Logs**: Database queries, cache operations, federation
- **Transport Layer Logs**: WebSocket, SSE, and stdio communication
- **Plugin System Logs**: Hook execution and plugin lifecycle events

### Useful Debug Commands

```bash
# Start with debug logging
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG mcpgateway --host 0.0.0.0 --port 4444

# Debug specific components
grep "gateway_service" logs/mcpgateway.log | tail -20
grep "ERROR\|WARNING" logs/mcpgateway.log

# Monitor in real-time during development
tail -f logs/mcpgateway.log | grep "tool_service"
```

---

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/logging.md, after:

# Logging

ContextForge provides comprehensive file-based logging with automatic rotation, dual-format output (JSON for files, text for console), and centralized logging service integration. This guide shows how to configure log levels, formats, destinations, and file management.

---

## 🧾 Log Structure

ContextForge uses dual-format logging:

- **File logs**: Structured JSON format for machine processing and log aggregation
- **Console logs**: Human-readable text format for development and debugging

### JSON Format (File Output)
```json
{
  "asctime": "2025-01-09 17:30:15,123",
  "name": "mcpgateway.gateway_service",
  "levelname": "INFO",
  "message": "Registered gateway: peer-gateway-1"
}
```

#### HTTP Access Logs (JSON)
```json
{
  "asctime": "2025-01-09 17:30:22,456",
  "name": "uvicorn.access",
  "levelname": "INFO",
  "message": "127.0.0.1:43926 - \"GET /version HTTP/1.1\" 401"
}
```

### Text Format (Console Output)
```
2025-01-09 17:30:15,123 - mcpgateway.gateway_service - INFO - Registered gateway: peer-gateway-1
```

---

## 🔧 Configuring Logs

ContextForge provides flexible logging with **stdout/stderr by default** and **optional file logging**. You can control logging behavior using `.env` settings or environment variables:

| Variable                | Description                        | Default           | Example                     |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ----------------- | --------------------------- |
| `LOG_LEVEL`             | Minimum log level                  | `INFO`            | `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARNING`  |
| `LOG_FORMAT`            | Console log format                 | `json`            | `json` or `text`            |
| `LOG_TO_FILE`           | **Enable file logging**            | **`false`**       | **`true`, `false`**         |
| `LOG_FILE`              | Log filename (when enabled)        | `null`            | `gateway.log`               |
| `LOG_FOLDER`            | Directory for log files            | `null`            | `/var/log/mcpgateway`       |
| `LOG_FILEMODE`          | File write mode                    | `a+`              | `a+` (append), `w` (overwrite) |
| `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED`  | **Enable log file rotation**       | **`false`**       | **`true`, `false`**         |
| `LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB`       | Max file size before rotation (MB) | `1`               | `10`, `50`, `100`           |
| `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT`      | Number of backup files to keep     | `5`               | `3`, `10`, `0` (no backups) |
| `STRUCTURED_LOGGING_DATABASE_ENABLED` | **Persist logs to database** | **`false`** | **`true`, `false`** |
| `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED` | **Enable audit trail logging for compliance** | **`false`** | **`true`, `false`** |
| `SECURITY_LOGGING_ENABLED` | **Enable security event logging** | **`false`** | **`true`, `false`** |
| `SECURITY_LOGGING_LEVEL` | Security logging verbosity level | `failures_only` | `all`, `failures_only`, `high_severity` |

### Logging Behavior

- **Default**: Logs **only to stdout/stderr** with human-readable text format (recommended for containers)
- **File Logging**: When `LOG_TO_FILE=true`, logs to **both** file (JSON format) and console (text format)
- **Log Rotation**: When `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true`, files rotate at `LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB` with `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT` backup files
- **No Rotation**: When `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=false`, files grow indefinitely (append mode)
- **Directory Creation**: Log folder is created automatically if it doesn't exist
- **Dual Output**: JSON logs to file, text logs to console simultaneously (when file logging enabled)

### Example Configurations

```bash
# Default: stdout/stderr only (recommended for containers)
LOG_LEVEL=INFO
# No additional config needed - logs to stdout/stderr only

# Optional: Enable file logging (no rotation)
LOG_TO_FILE=true
LOG_FOLDER=/var/log/mcpgateway
LOG_FILE=gateway.log
LOG_FILEMODE=a+

# Production with file rotation
LOG_TO_FILE=true
LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true
LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB=10
LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=7
LOG_FOLDER=/var/log/mcpgateway
LOG_FILE=gateway.log

# Development with file logging and rotation
LOG_TO_FILE=true
LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true
LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB=1
LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=3
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
LOG_FOLDER=./logs
LOG_FILE=debug.log
LOG_FORMAT=text
```

---

## 📋 Audit Trail Logging

Audit trail logging records all CRUD operations (create, read, update, delete) on resources for compliance purposes. **This is disabled by default for performance**.

### Configuration

```bash
# Audit trail logging - disabled by default for performance
AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=false
```

### What Gets Logged

When enabled, all API operations are recorded in the `audit_trails` table:

- **Create** - New tools, servers, gateways, resources, prompts
- **Read** - View operations on any resource
- **Update** - Modifications with before/after values
- **Delete** - Deletions with snapshot of deleted data

### Use Cases

| Scenario | Recommendation |
|----------|----------------|
| Production compliance (SOC2, HIPAA, GDPR) | `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=true` |
| Load testing / benchmarking | `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=false` |
| Development / debugging | `AUDIT_TRAIL_ENABLED=false` |

!!! warning "Performance Impact"
    Enabling audit trails causes a **database write on every API request**. During load testing with 2000 concurrent users, this can generate ~1 million rows in a few hours, consuming 788+ MB of database space and causing PostgreSQL memory pressure. **Always disable for load testing.**

### Audit Trails Table

Query audit trails via the API: `GET /api/logs/audit-trails`

---

## 🔐 Security Event Logging

Security event logging records authentication attempts, authorization failures, and other security-relevant events to the database. **This is disabled by default for performance**.

### Configuration

```bash
# Security event logging - disabled by default for performance
SECURITY_LOGGING_ENABLED=false

# Security logging level controls what gets logged
SECURITY_LOGGING_LEVEL=failures_only  # all, failures_only, high_severity
```

### Logging Levels

| Level | Description | Use Case |
|-------|-------------|----------|
| `all` | Log all events including successful authentications | Debugging, compliance auditing (high DB load) |
| `failures_only` | Log only authentication/authorization failures | Production monitoring without excessive writes |
| `high_severity` | Log only high/critical severity events | Minimal logging for high-traffic environments |

!!! warning "Performance Impact"
    Setting `SECURITY_LOGGING_LEVEL=all` logs **every authenticated request** to the database. During load testing, this can generate 300+ database writes per second, causing significant performance degradation. Use `failures_only` or `high_severity` in production.

### Security Events Table

When enabled, events are stored in the `security_events` table:

- Authentication success/failure
- Authorization denials
- Rate limiting triggers
- Suspicious activity detection

Query security events via the API: `GET /api/logs/security-events`

---

## 📂 Log File Management

**Note**: This section applies only when file logging is enabled with `LOG_TO_FILE=true`. By default, ContextForge logs only to stdout/stderr.

### Viewing Log Files

```bash
# View current log file
cat logs/mcpgateway.log

# Follow log file in real-time
tail -f logs/mcpgateway.log

# View with JSON formatting (requires jq)
tail -f logs/mcpgateway.log | jq '.'

# Search logs for specific patterns
grep "ERROR" logs/mcpgateway.log
grep "gateway_service" logs/*.log
```

### Log Rotation

**Log rotation is optional** and only applies when both file logging and rotation are enabled:

- `LOG_TO_FILE=true` - Enable file logging
- `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=true` - Enable rotation

When enabled, files automatically rotate based on the configured size limit (`LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB`):

```
logs/
├── mcpgateway.log      (current, active log)
├── mcpgateway.log.1    (most recent backup)
├── mcpgateway.log.2    (second backup)
├── mcpgateway.log.3    (third backup)
└── ...                 (up to LOG_BACKUP_COUNT backups)
```

**Configuration Options:**

- `LOG_MAX_SIZE_MB=10` - Rotate when file reaches 10MB
- `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=3` - Keep 3 backup files (plus current file = 4 total)
- `LOG_BACKUP_COUNT=0` - No backup files (only current file kept)

**Without Rotation:**

- When `LOG_ROTATION_ENABLED=false`, files grow indefinitely
- Use external log management tools for cleanup if needed

### Cleanup and Maintenance

```bash
# Archive old logs (optional)
tar -czf mcpgateway-logs-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz logs/mcpgateway.log.*

# Clear all log files (be careful!)
rm logs/mcpgateway.log*

# Check log file sizes
du -sh logs/*
```

---

## 🖥️ Admin UI Log Viewer

ContextForge includes a built-in log viewer in the Admin UI that provides real-time monitoring, filtering, and export capabilities without requiring direct file access.

### Enabling the Log Viewer

The log viewer is automatically available when the Admin UI is enabled:

```bash
# Enable Admin UI (includes log viewer)
MCPGATEWAY_UI_ENABLED=true

# Configure in-memory log buffer size (default: 1MB)
LOG_BUFFER_SIZE_MB=2  # Increase for more log history
```

### Features

#### Real-Time Monitoring
- **Live streaming** via Server-Sent Events (SSE)
- **Automatic updates** as new logs are generated
- **Visual indicators** with pulse animation for new entries
- **Color-coded severity levels**:

  - Debug: Gray
  - Info: Blue
  - Warning: Yellow
  - Error: Red
  - Critical: Purple

#### Filtering & Search
- **Filter by log level**: Debug, Info, Warning, Error, Critical
- **Filter by entity type**: Tool, Resource, Server, Gateway
- **Full-text search**: Search within log messages
- **Time range filtering**: Filter by date/time range
- **Request ID tracing**: Track logs for specific requests

#### Export Capabilities
- **Export to JSON**: Download filtered logs as JSON file
- **Export to CSV**: Download filtered logs as CSV file
- **Download log files**: Direct access to rotated log files (if file logging enabled)

### Accessing the Log Viewer

1. Navigate to the Admin UI: `http://localhost:4444/admin`
2. Click the **"Logs"** tab in the navigation
3. Use the filter controls to refine your view:

   - Select entity type from dropdown
   - Choose minimum log level
   - Enter search terms
   - Set pagination options

### API Endpoints

The log viewer also exposes REST API endpoints for programmatic access:

```bash
# Get filtered logs
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs?level=error&limit=50"

# Stream logs in real-time (SSE)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs/stream"

# Export logs as JSON
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs/export?format=json" \
  -o logs.json

# List available log files
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:4444/admin/logs/file"
```

### Buffer Management

The log viewer uses an in-memory circular buffer with configurable size:

- **Default size**: 1MB (approximately 2000-5000 log entries)
- **Size-based eviction**: Oldest logs automatically removed when buffer is full
- **No persistence**: Buffer is cleared on server restart
- **Performance**: Minimal memory overhead with O(1) operations

### Configuration Options

| Variable              | Description                          | Default | Example |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------ | ------- | ------- |
| `LOG_BUFFER_SIZE_MB` | In-memory buffer size for UI viewer | `1`     | `2`, `5`, `10` |

### Best Practices

1. **Adjust buffer size** based on your monitoring needs:

   - Development: 1-2MB is usually sufficient
   - Production: Consider 5-10MB for longer history

2. **Use filters** to focus on relevant logs:

   - Filter by error level during troubleshooting
   - Filter by entity when debugging specific components

3. **Export regularly** if you need to preserve logs:

   - The buffer is in-memory only and clears on restart
   - Export important logs to JSON/CSV for archival

4. **Combine with file logging** for persistence:

   - UI viewer for real-time monitoring
   - File logs for long-term storage and analysis

---

## 📡 Streaming Logs (Containers)

```bash
docker logs -f mcpgateway
# or with Podman
podman logs -f mcpgateway
```

---

## 📤 Shipping Logs to External Services

ContextForge can write to stdout or a file. To forward logs to services like:

* **ELK (Elastic Stack)**
* **LogDNA / IBM Log Analysis**
* **Datadog**
* **Fluentd / Loki**

You can:

* Mount log files to a sidecar container
* Use a logging agent (e.g., Filebeat)
* Pipe logs to syslog-compatible services

---

## 🗄️ Database Log Persistence

ContextForge can optionally persist structured logs to the database for advanced search, request tracing, and performance metrics. **This feature is disabled by default for performance reasons.**

### Enabling Database Logging

```bash
# Enable database persistence for logs
STRUCTURED_LOGGING_DATABASE_ENABLED=true
```

### Features When Enabled

When `STRUCTURED_LOGGING_DATABASE_ENABLED=true`, you get:

| Feature | API Endpoint | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| **Log Search** | `POST /api/logs/search` | Search logs by level, component, user, time range, correlation ID |
| **Request Tracing** | `GET /api/logs/trace/{correlation_id}` | View all logs, security events, and audit trails for a single request |
| **Performance Metrics** | `GET /api/logs/performance-metrics` | Aggregated p50/p95/p99 latencies, error rates by component |
| **Security Events** | `GET /api/logs/security-events` | Authentication failures, threat detection, security audit |
| **Audit Trails** | `GET /api/logs/audit-trails` | CRUD operations, data access compliance logging |

### Example: Search Logs via API

```bash
# Search for error logs in the last hour
curl -X POST "http://localhost:4444/api/logs/search" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "level": ["ERROR", "CRITICAL"],
    "limit": 50,
    "sort_order": "desc"
  }'

# Trace all logs for a specific request
curl "http://localhost:4444/api/logs/trace/abc-123-correlation-id" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```

### Performance Considerations

!!! warning "Performance Impact"
    When enabled, **each log entry triggers a synchronous database write**. This can significantly impact performance under high load.

**Recommendations:**

- **Disable in production** if you use an external log aggregator (ELK, Datadog, Splunk)
- **Enable for development** or low-traffic deployments where built-in search is useful
- **Consider external logging** for high-throughput production environments

### When to Enable vs Disable

| Scenario | Recommendation |
|----------|----------------|
| Development/testing | ✅ Enable - useful for debugging |
| Low-traffic production | ✅ Enable - built-in observability |
| High-traffic production | ❌ Disable - use external aggregator |
| Using ELK/Datadog/Splunk | ❌ Disable - redundant storage |
| Need request tracing | ✅ Enable - correlation ID tracing |
| Performance-critical | ❌ Disable - avoid DB I/O overhead |

---

## 🧪 Debug Mode

For development and troubleshooting, enable verbose logging:

```env
# Enable debug logging
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
LOG_FORMAT=text
LOG_FOLDER=./debug-logs
LOG_FILE=debug.log
DEBUG=true
```

### Debug Features

- **HTTP Access Logs**: All HTTP requests with IP, method, path, status code (via `uvicorn.access`)
- **HTTP Error Logs**: Server errors, invalid requests (via `uvicorn.error`)
- **Internal Service Logs**: Database queries, cache operations, federation
- **Transport Layer Logs**: WebSocket, SSE, and stdio communication
- **Plugin System Logs**: Hook execution and plugin lifecycle events

### Useful Debug Commands

```bash
# Start with debug logging
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG mcpgateway --host 0.0.0.0 --port 4444

# Debug specific components
grep "gateway_service" logs/mcpgateway.log | tail -20
grep "ERROR\|WARNING" logs/mcpgateway.log

# Monitor in real-time during development
tail -f logs/mcpgateway.log | grep "tool_service"
```

---
