docs/docs/manage/oauth.md, before:

# OAuth 2.0 Integration

This guide explains how to configure and operate OAuth 2.0 authentication for MCP Gateway when connecting to MCP servers or downstream APIs on behalf of users or services.

Related design docs:

- Architecture: [oauth-design.md](../architecture/oauth-design.md)
- UI Flow: [oauth-authorization-code-ui-design.md](../architecture/oauth-authorization-code-ui-design.md)

---

## What You Get

- Client Credentials and Authorization Code flows
- Per-gateway OAuth configuration with encrypted client secrets
- Fresh tokens on demand (no caching by default)
- Optional token storage and refresh for user flows (per design)
- Admin UI support for configuring providers

!!! tip
    OAuth is configured per Gateway. Tools that route through a gateway configured for OAuth inherit the token behavior.

---

## Supported Flows

- Client Credentials (machine-to-machine)

  - Uses client ID/secret to fetch access tokens
  - Best for service integrations without user consent

- Authorization Code (user delegation)

  - Redirects the user to the provider for consent
  - Exchanges code for access token, with optional refresh tokens

See the flow details and security model in the architecture docs.

---

## Prerequisites

- An OAuth 2.0 provider (e.g., GitHub, Google, custom OIDC)
- A registered application with:

  - Client ID and Client Secret
  - Authorization URL and Token URL
  - Redirect URI pointing to the gateway callback (for Authorization Code)

---

## Environment Variables

```bash
# OAuth HTTP behavior
OAUTH_REQUEST_TIMEOUT=30      # Seconds
OAUTH_MAX_RETRIES=3           # Retries for transient failures
OAUTH_DEFAULT_TIMEOUT=3600    # Default OAuth token timeout in seconds

# Secret encryption for stored OAuth client secrets (and tokens if enabled)
AUTH_ENCRYPTION_SECRET=<strong-random-key>
```

!!! important
    Always run MCP Gateway over HTTPS when using OAuth. Never transmit client secrets or authorization codes over insecure channels.

---

## Configure a Gateway (Admin UI)

1. Open Admin UI → Gateways → New Gateway (or Edit).
2. Set Authentication type = OAuth.
3. Choose Grant Type:

   - client_credentials
   - authorization_code

4. Fill fields:

   - Client ID
   - Client Secret (stored encrypted at rest)
   - Token URL
   - Scopes (space-separated)
   - Authorization URL and Redirect URI (required for Authorization Code)

5. Save.

Field mapping follows the architecture proposal and is used by the OAuth Manager service to request tokens.

---

## Configure a Gateway (JSON/API)

Example OAuth-enabled gateway record:

```json
{
  "name": "GitHub MCP",
  "url": "https://github-mcp.example.com/sse",
  "auth_type": "oauth",
  "oauth_config": {
    "grant_type": "authorization_code",
    "client_id": "your_github_app_id",
    "client_secret": "your_github_app_secret",
    "authorization_url": "https://github.com/login/oauth/authorize",
    "token_url": "https://github.com/login/oauth/access_token",
    "redirect_uri": "https://gateway.example.com/oauth/callback",
    "scopes": ["repo", "read:user"]
  }
}
```

For Client Credentials, omit `authorization_url` and `redirect_uri` and set `grant_type` to `client_credentials`.

---

## Redirect URI and Callback

- Default callback path: `/oauth/callback`
- Your provider must whitelist the full redirect URI, e.g. `https://gateway.example.com/oauth/callback`
- The gateway handles exchanging the authorization code for an access token and applies it as `Authorization: Bearer <token>` when contacting the MCP server

Sequence (Authorization Code):

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Gateway as MCP Gateway
    participant OAuth as OAuth Provider
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    User->>Gateway: Request OAuth-enabled operation
    Gateway->>Gateway: Generate authorization URL
    Gateway-->>User: 302 Redirect to provider
    User->>OAuth: Login and consent
    OAuth-->>Gateway: Redirect (code, state)
    Gateway->>OAuth: POST /token (code)
    OAuth-->>Gateway: Access token (±refresh)
    Gateway->>MCP: Request with Bearer token
    MCP-->>Gateway: Response
    Gateway-->>User: Result
```

---

## Token Storage and Refresh

OAuth tokens are stored per gateway and user for the Authorization Code flow to ensure proper security isolation:

- **User-Scoped Tokens**: OAuth tokens are scoped per MCP Gateway user (using app_user_email field) to prevent token sharing between users
- Store tokens per gateway + user combination with unique constraints
- Auto-refresh using refresh tokens when near expiry
- Encrypt tokens at rest using `AUTH_ENCRYPTION_SECRET`
- Foreign key relationships ensure token cleanup when users are deleted

!!! important "Security Enhancement"
    OAuth tokens are now user-scoped to prevent token sharing between users. Each Authorization Code flow token is tied to the specific MCP Gateway user who authorized it, providing better security isolation.

---

## Provider Examples

### GitHub (Authorization Code)

- Authorization URL: `https://github.com/login/oauth/authorize`
- Token URL: `https://github.com/login/oauth/access_token`
- Scopes: `repo read:user`
- Redirect URI: `https://<your-domain>/oauth/callback`

### Generic OIDC (Client Credentials)

- Token URL: `https://idp.example.com/oauth2/token`
- Scopes: provider-specific
- No redirect required

---

## Security Recommendations

- Use least-privilege scopes
- Run behind HTTPS only (including callback)
- Rotate client secrets and avoid plaintext storage
- Restrict who can create/modify OAuth-configured gateways
- Monitor token fetch errors and rate limits from providers

See also: [securing.md](./securing.md) for general hardening guidance and [proxy.md](./proxy.md) for fronting the gateway with an auth proxy.

---

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and quick fixes:

- **401 from MCP after OAuth**: Verify scopes and that token is attached as `Authorization: Bearer` by the gateway
- **Provider denies callback**: Check exact Redirect URI match and HTTPS
- **Invalid client**: Confirm Client ID/Secret and application registration
- **State mismatch / "Invalid or expired state parameter"**: See the detailed [OAuth Troubleshooting Guide](oauth-troubleshooting.md)
- **Timeouts**: Increase `OAUTH_REQUEST_TIMEOUT` or investigate provider availability

!!! tip "Detailed Troubleshooting"
    For comprehensive debugging steps, error message explanations, and state storage configuration, see the [OAuth Troubleshooting Guide](oauth-troubleshooting.md).

---

## PKCE Support

MCP Gateway implements **PKCE (Proof Key for Code Exchange)** as defined in [RFC 7636](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7636) for all Authorization Code flows. This provides enhanced security, especially for:

- Public clients (mobile apps, SPAs, desktop apps)
- Environments where client secrets cannot be securely stored
- Protection against authorization code interception attacks

**How it works:**

1. Gateway generates a random `code_verifier` (43-128 characters)
2. Computes `code_challenge` = BASE64URL(SHA256(code_verifier))
3. Sends `code_challenge` and `code_challenge_method=S256` in authorization request
4. Stores `code_verifier` in OAuth state (encrypted at rest)
5. Includes `code_verifier` when exchanging authorization code for token

PKCE is **automatically enabled** for all Authorization Code flows - no configuration needed.

---

## FAQ

- **Can I use PKCE?** Yes! PKCE is automatically enabled for all Authorization Code flows (RFC 7636).
- **Can I configure per-tool OAuth?** Roadmap considers multiple OAuth configs per tool; current design is per-gateway.
- **Do you cache tokens?** Default is no caching; tokens are fetched per operation. Optional storage/refresh is available for Authorization Code flows.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/oauth.md, after:

# OAuth 2.0 Integration

This guide explains how to configure and operate OAuth 2.0 authentication for ContextForge when connecting to MCP servers or downstream APIs on behalf of users or services.

Related design docs:

- Architecture: [oauth-design.md](../architecture/oauth-design.md)
- UI Flow: [oauth-authorization-code-ui-design.md](../architecture/oauth-authorization-code-ui-design.md)

---

## What You Get

- Client Credentials and Authorization Code flows
- Per-gateway OAuth configuration with encrypted client secrets
- Fresh tokens on demand (no caching by default)
- Optional token storage and refresh for user flows (per design)
- Admin UI support for configuring providers

!!! tip
    OAuth is configured per Gateway. Tools that route through a gateway configured for OAuth inherit the token behavior.

---

## Supported Flows

- Client Credentials (machine-to-machine)

  - Uses client ID/secret to fetch access tokens
  - Best for service integrations without user consent

- Authorization Code (user delegation)

  - Redirects the user to the provider for consent
  - Exchanges code for access token, with optional refresh tokens

See the flow details and security model in the architecture docs.

---

## Prerequisites

- An OAuth 2.0 provider (e.g., GitHub, Google, custom OIDC)
- A registered application with:

  - Client ID and Client Secret
  - Authorization URL and Token URL
  - Redirect URI pointing to the gateway callback (for Authorization Code)

---

## Environment Variables

```bash
# OAuth HTTP behavior
OAUTH_REQUEST_TIMEOUT=30      # Seconds
OAUTH_MAX_RETRIES=3           # Retries for transient failures
OAUTH_DEFAULT_TIMEOUT=3600    # Default OAuth token timeout in seconds

# Secret encryption for stored OAuth client secrets (and tokens if enabled)
AUTH_ENCRYPTION_SECRET=<strong-random-key>
```

!!! important
    Always run ContextForge over HTTPS when using OAuth. Never transmit client secrets or authorization codes over insecure channels.

---

## Configure a Gateway (Admin UI)

1. Open Admin UI → Gateways → New Gateway (or Edit).
2. Set Authentication type = OAuth.
3. Choose Grant Type:

   - client_credentials
   - authorization_code

4. Fill fields:

   - Client ID
   - Client Secret (stored encrypted at rest)
   - Token URL
   - Scopes (space-separated)
   - Authorization URL and Redirect URI (required for Authorization Code)

5. Save.

Field mapping follows the architecture proposal and is used by the OAuth Manager service to request tokens.

---

## Configure a Gateway (JSON/API)

Example OAuth-enabled gateway record:

```json
{
  "name": "GitHub MCP",
  "url": "https://github-mcp.example.com/sse",
  "auth_type": "oauth",
  "oauth_config": {
    "grant_type": "authorization_code",
    "client_id": "your_github_app_id",
    "client_secret": "your_github_app_secret",
    "authorization_url": "https://github.com/login/oauth/authorize",
    "token_url": "https://github.com/login/oauth/access_token",
    "redirect_uri": "https://gateway.example.com/oauth/callback",
    "scopes": ["repo", "read:user"]
  }
}
```

For Client Credentials, omit `authorization_url` and `redirect_uri` and set `grant_type` to `client_credentials`.

---

## Redirect URI and Callback

- Default callback path: `/oauth/callback`
- Your provider must whitelist the full redirect URI, e.g. `https://gateway.example.com/oauth/callback`
- The gateway handles exchanging the authorization code for an access token and applies it as `Authorization: Bearer <token>` when contacting the MCP server

Sequence (Authorization Code):

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Gateway as ContextForge
    participant OAuth as OAuth Provider
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    User->>Gateway: Request OAuth-enabled operation
    Gateway->>Gateway: Generate authorization URL
    Gateway-->>User: 302 Redirect to provider
    User->>OAuth: Login and consent
    OAuth-->>Gateway: Redirect (code, state)
    Gateway->>OAuth: POST /token (code)
    OAuth-->>Gateway: Access token (±refresh)
    Gateway->>MCP: Request with Bearer token
    MCP-->>Gateway: Response
    Gateway-->>User: Result
```

---

## Token Storage and Refresh

OAuth tokens are stored per gateway and user for the Authorization Code flow to ensure proper security isolation:

- **User-Scoped Tokens**: OAuth tokens are scoped per ContextForge user (using app_user_email field) to prevent token sharing between users
- Store tokens per gateway + user combination with unique constraints
- Auto-refresh using refresh tokens when near expiry
- Encrypt tokens at rest using `AUTH_ENCRYPTION_SECRET`
- Foreign key relationships ensure token cleanup when users are deleted

!!! important "Security Enhancement"
    OAuth tokens are now user-scoped to prevent token sharing between users. Each Authorization Code flow token is tied to the specific ContextForge user who authorized it, providing better security isolation.

---

## Provider Examples

### GitHub (Authorization Code)

- Authorization URL: `https://github.com/login/oauth/authorize`
- Token URL: `https://github.com/login/oauth/access_token`
- Scopes: `repo read:user`
- Redirect URI: `https://<your-domain>/oauth/callback`

### Generic OIDC (Client Credentials)

- Token URL: `https://idp.example.com/oauth2/token`
- Scopes: provider-specific
- No redirect required

---

## Security Recommendations

- Use least-privilege scopes
- Run behind HTTPS only (including callback)
- Rotate client secrets and avoid plaintext storage
- Restrict who can create/modify OAuth-configured gateways
- Monitor token fetch errors and rate limits from providers

See also: [securing.md](./securing.md) for general hardening guidance and [proxy.md](./proxy.md) for fronting the gateway with an auth proxy.

---

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and quick fixes:

- **401 from MCP after OAuth**: Verify scopes and that token is attached as `Authorization: Bearer` by the gateway
- **Provider denies callback**: Check exact Redirect URI match and HTTPS
- **Invalid client**: Confirm Client ID/Secret and application registration
- **State mismatch / "Invalid or expired state parameter"**: See the detailed [OAuth Troubleshooting Guide](oauth-troubleshooting.md)
- **Timeouts**: Increase `OAUTH_REQUEST_TIMEOUT` or investigate provider availability

!!! tip "Detailed Troubleshooting"
    For comprehensive debugging steps, error message explanations, and state storage configuration, see the [OAuth Troubleshooting Guide](oauth-troubleshooting.md).

---

## PKCE Support

ContextForge implements **PKCE (Proof Key for Code Exchange)** as defined in [RFC 7636](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7636) for all Authorization Code flows. This provides enhanced security, especially for:

- Public clients (mobile apps, SPAs, desktop apps)
- Environments where client secrets cannot be securely stored
- Protection against authorization code interception attacks

**How it works:**

1. Gateway generates a random `code_verifier` (43-128 characters)
2. Computes `code_challenge` = BASE64URL(SHA256(code_verifier))
3. Sends `code_challenge` and `code_challenge_method=S256` in authorization request
4. Stores `code_verifier` in OAuth state (encrypted at rest)
5. Includes `code_verifier` when exchanging authorization code for token

PKCE is **automatically enabled** for all Authorization Code flows - no configuration needed.

---

## FAQ

- **Can I use PKCE?** Yes! PKCE is automatically enabled for all Authorization Code flows (RFC 7636).
- **Can I configure per-tool OAuth?** Roadmap considers multiple OAuth configs per tool; current design is per-gateway.
- **Do you cache tokens?** Default is no caching; tokens are fetched per operation. Optional storage/refresh is available for Authorization Code flows.
