docs/docs/manage/proxy.md, before:

# Proxy Authentication

Configure MCP Gateway to work with authentication proxies for enterprise deployments.

## Overview

MCP Gateway supports proxy authentication, allowing you to disable built-in JWT authentication and rely on an upstream authentication proxy. This is essential for enterprise deployments where authentication is centralized through OAuth2, SAML, or other identity providers.

## Architecture

### Standard JWT Authentication Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant Gateway as MCP Gateway
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    Client->>Client: Generate JWT Token
    Client->>Gateway: Request + Bearer Token
    Gateway->>Gateway: Validate JWT
    alt Valid Token
        Gateway->>MCP: Forward Request
        MCP-->>Gateway: Response
        Gateway-->>Client: Response
    else Invalid Token
        Gateway-->>Client: 401 Unauthorized
    end
```

### Proxy Authentication Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Proxy as Auth Proxy
    participant IDP as Identity Provider
    participant Gateway as MCP Gateway
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    User->>Proxy: Request
    Proxy->>IDP: Validate Session
    IDP-->>Proxy: User Identity
    Proxy->>Gateway: Request + X-Authenticated-User
    Gateway->>Gateway: Extract User from Header
    Gateway->>MCP: Forward Request
    MCP-->>Gateway: Response
    Gateway-->>Proxy: Response
    Proxy-->>User: Response
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED` | `true` | Enable/disable JWT authentication for MCP operations |
| `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH` | `false` | Trust proxy authentication headers (required when `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false`) |
| `PROXY_USER_HEADER` | `X-Authenticated-User` | Header containing authenticated username from proxy |
| `AUTH_REQUIRED` | `true` | Controls admin UI authentication (independent of MCP auth) |

!!! warning "Security Notice"
    Only set `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false` when MCP Gateway is deployed behind a trusted authentication proxy. Setting `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` explicitly acknowledges this security requirement.

### Basic Configuration

```bash title=".env"
# Disable MCP client JWT authentication
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false

# Trust proxy authentication headers
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true

# Header containing authenticated user
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User

# Keep admin UI protected (uses email/password authentication)
AUTH_REQUIRED=true
PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL=admin@example.com
PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD=secure-password
```

!!! info "Admin UI Authentication"
    The Admin UI uses email/password authentication (`PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL`/`PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD`), not Basic auth. Basic authentication for API endpoints is disabled by default for security.

## Deployment Patterns

### Pattern 1: OAuth2 Proxy

```mermaid
graph LR
    User[User] -->|HTTPS| LB[Load Balancer]
    LB --> OAuth[OAuth2 Proxy]
    OAuth -->|X-Auth-Request-User| Gateway[MCP Gateway]
    Gateway --> MCP1[MCP Server 1]
    Gateway --> MCP2[MCP Server 2]

    OAuth -.->|OAuth Flow| IDP[Google/GitHub/etc]

    style OAuth fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Docker Compose Example

```yaml title="docker-compose.yml"
version: '3.8'

services:
  oauth2-proxy:
    image: quay.io/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy:v7.5.0
    command:

      - --http-address=0.0.0.0:4180
      - --upstream=http://mcp-gateway:4444
      - --email-domain=*
      - --pass-user-headers=true
      - --set-xauthrequest=true
      - --skip-provider-button=true
    environment:
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: ${OAUTH_CLIENT_ID}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: ${OAUTH_CLIENT_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${COOKIE_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PROVIDER: google
    ports:

      - "4180:4180"
    networks:

      - mcp-network

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/contingentai/mcp-gateway:latest
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: "false"
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: "true"
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: "X-Auth-Request-Email"
      AUTH_REQUIRED: "true"
      BASIC_AUTH_USER: ${ADMIN_USER}
      BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD: ${ADMIN_PASSWORD}
      DATABASE_URL: postgresql+psycopg://postgres:password@db:5432/mcp
    depends_on:

      - db
    networks:

      - mcp-network

  db:
    image: postgres:15
    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: mcp
      POSTGRES_USER: postgres
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: password
    volumes:

      - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    networks:

      - mcp-network

networks:
  mcp-network:
    driver: bridge

volumes:
  postgres_data:
```

### Pattern 2: Kubernetes with Istio

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Kubernetes Cluster"
        subgraph "Istio Service Mesh"
            IG[Istio Gateway] --> VS[Virtual Service]
            VS --> AuthZ[Authorization Policy]
            AuthZ --> Gateway[MCP Gateway Pod]
        end

        Gateway --> MCP1[MCP Server Pod 1]
        Gateway --> MCP2[MCP Server Pod 2]

        OIDC[OIDC Provider] -.->|JWT Validation| AuthZ
    end

    User[User] -->|HTTPS + JWT| IG

    style AuthZ fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Kubernetes Manifests

```yaml title="mcp-gateway-deployment.yaml"
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway
  namespace: mcp-system
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: mcp-gateway
        version: v1
    spec:
      containers:

      - name: mcp-gateway
        image: ghcr.io/contingentai/mcp-gateway:latest
        env:

        - name: MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED
          value: "false"

        - name: TRUST_PROXY_AUTH
          value: "true"

        - name: PROXY_USER_HEADER
          value: "X-User-Id"

        - name: DATABASE_URL
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: mcp-gateway-secrets
              key: database-url
        ports:

        - containerPort: 4444
          name: http
        livenessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: http
          initialDelaySeconds: 30
          periodSeconds: 10
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /ready
            port: http
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 5
```

```yaml title="istio-authorization.yaml"
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: RequestAuthentication
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-jwt
  namespace: mcp-system
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  jwtRules:

  - issuer: "https://accounts.google.com"
    jwksUri: "https://www.googleapis.com/oauth2/v3/certs"
    outputPayloadToHeader: "X-User-Id"
---
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: AuthorizationPolicy
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-authz
  namespace: mcp-system
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  action: ALLOW
  rules:

  - from:
    - source:
        requestPrincipals: ["*"]
```

### Pattern 3: API Gateway (Kong)

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Kong API Gateway"
        Plugin[OIDC Plugin] --> Route[Route]
        Route --> Service[Service]
    end

    User[User] -->|HTTPS| Plugin
    Service -->|X-Consumer-Username| Gateway[MCP Gateway]
    Gateway --> MCP[MCP Servers]

    Plugin -.->|OIDC Flow| IDP[Keycloak/Auth0]

    style Plugin fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Kong Configuration

```yaml title="kong-config.yaml"
services:

  - name: mcp-gateway
    url: http://mcp-gateway:4444
    routes:

      - name: mcp-route
        paths:

          - /mcp
    plugins:

      - name: oidc
        config:
          client_id: mcp-client
          client_secret: ${OIDC_SECRET}
          discovery: https://auth.example.com/.well-known/openid-configuration
          introspection_endpoint: https://auth.example.com/introspect
          bearer_only: "yes"
          realm: mcp-gateway
          header_names:

            - X-Consumer-Username:preferred_username
            - X-Consumer-Id:sub
```

## Common Proxy Configurations

### Authelia

```yaml title="authelia-config.yml"
authentication_backend:
  ldap:
    url: ldaps://ldap.example.com
    base_dn: dc=example,dc=com

access_control:
  default_policy: deny
  rules:

    - domain: mcp.example.com
      policy: two_factor
      subject:

        - group:mcp-users

# Headers forwarded to backend
authorization:
  headers:
    Remote-User: username
    Remote-Email: email
    Remote-Groups: groups
```

MCP Gateway configuration:
```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=Remote-User
```

### Cloudflare Access

```mermaid
graph LR
    User[User] -->|HTTPS| CF[Cloudflare Edge]
    CF -->|Cf-Access-Jwt-Assertion| Gateway[MCP Gateway]

    CF -.->|SAML/OIDC| IDP[Identity Provider]

    style CF fill:#f90,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

Configuration:
```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=Cf-Access-Authenticated-User-Email
```

### AWS ALB with Cognito

```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Amzn-Oidc-Identity
```

## Header Passthrough

When using proxy authentication, you often need to pass additional headers to downstream MCP servers:

```bash
# Enable header passthrough
ENABLE_HEADER_PASSTHROUGH=true

# Optional: Enable overwriting of base headers (advanced usage)
ENABLE_OVERWRITE_BASE_HEADERS=false

# Headers to pass through (JSON array)
DEFAULT_PASSTHROUGH_HEADERS='["X-Tenant-Id", "X-Request-Id", "X-Authenticated-User", "X-Groups"]'
```

### X-Upstream-Authorization Header

When MCP Gateway uses authentication (JWT/Bearer/Basic/OAuth), clients face an Authorization header conflict when trying to pass different auth to upstream MCP servers.

**Problem**: You need one `Authorization` header for gateway auth and a different one for upstream MCP servers.

**Solution**: Use the `X-Upstream-Authorization` header, which the gateway automatically renames to `Authorization` when forwarding to upstream servers.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant Gateway as MCP Gateway
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    Client->>Gateway: Authorization: Bearer gateway_token<br/>X-Upstream-Authorization: Bearer upstream_token
    Gateway->>Gateway: Validate gateway_token
    Gateway->>MCP: Authorization: Bearer upstream_token<br/>(X-Upstream-Authorization renamed)
    MCP-->>Gateway: Response
    Gateway-->>Client: Response
```

#### Example Usage

```bash
# Client authenticates to gateway with one token
# and passes different auth to upstream MCP server
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $GATEWAY_JWT" \
     -H "X-Upstream-Authorization: Bearer $MCP_SERVER_TOKEN" \
     -X POST http://localhost:4444/tools/invoke/github_create_issue \
     -d '{"arguments": {"title": "New Issue"}}'
```

#### Configuration

This feature is automatically enabled when the gateway uses authentication:

```bash
# Any of these auth methods enable X-Upstream-Authorization handling
AUTH_REQUIRED=true
BASIC_AUTH_USER=admin
JWT_SECRET_KEY=your-secret

# Or OAuth-enabled gateways
# oauth_config in gateway configuration
```

The gateway will always process `X-Upstream-Authorization` headers when:

1. The gateway itself uses authentication (`auth_type` in ["basic", "bearer", "oauth"])
2. The header value passes security validation

**Note**: `X-Upstream-Authorization` processing is independent of the `ENABLE_HEADER_PASSTHROUGH` flag and always works when the gateway uses authentication.

#### Security Notes

- Headers are sanitized before forwarding
- Only processed when gateway authentication is enabled
- Failed sanitization logs warnings but doesn't block requests
- Provides clean separation between gateway and upstream authentication

## Security Considerations

### Network Isolation

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "DMZ"
        WAF[WAF] --> LB[Load Balancer]
        LB --> Proxy[Auth Proxy]
    end

    subgraph "Private Network"
        Proxy -->|Internal Only| Gateway[MCP Gateway]
        Gateway --> MCP1[MCP Server 1]
        Gateway --> MCP2[MCP Server 2]
    end

    Internet[Internet] -->|HTTPS| WAF

    style Proxy fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

!!! danger "Critical Security Requirements"

    1. **Never expose MCP Gateway directly** to the internet when proxy auth is enabled
    2. **Use TLS** for all communication between proxy and gateway
    3. **Implement network policies** to ensure only the proxy can reach the gateway
    4. **Validate proxy certificates** in production environments
    5. **Monitor authentication logs** for suspicious activity

### Recommended Security Headers

Configure your proxy to add these security headers:

```nginx title="nginx.conf"
# Security headers
add_header X-Frame-Options "DENY" always;
add_header X-Content-Type-Options "nosniff" always;
add_header X-XSS-Protection "1; mode=block" always;
add_header Referrer-Policy "strict-origin-when-cross-origin" always;
add_header Content-Security-Policy "default-src 'self'" always;

# Remove sensitive headers
proxy_hide_header X-Powered-By;
proxy_hide_header Server;

# Pass authentication headers
proxy_set_header X-Authenticated-User $remote_user;
proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
```

## Testing

### Verify Configuration

```bash
# Test without authentication (should fail or return anonymous)
curl -v http://localhost:4444/tools

# Test with proxy header
curl -H "X-Authenticated-User: john.doe@example.com" \
     http://localhost:4444/tools

# Test WebSocket with proxy header
wscat -c ws://localhost:4444/ws \
      -H "X-Authenticated-User: john.doe@example.com"
```

### Health Checks

Configure your load balancer to use these endpoints:

| Endpoint | Purpose | Expected Response |
|----------|---------|-------------------|
| `/health` | Liveness probe | 200 OK |
| `/ready` | Readiness probe | 200 OK when ready |
| `/metrics` | Prometheus metrics | Metrics in text format |

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

??? question "Getting 401 Unauthorized with proxy headers"
    **Check these settings:**

    1. Verify `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false`
    2. Ensure `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true`
    3. Confirm header name matches `PROXY_USER_HEADER`
    4. Check proxy is sending the header:
    ```bash
    # Debug headers being received
    curl -H "X-Authenticated-User: test" \
         http://localhost:4444/version -v
    ```

??? question "Warning: MCP auth disabled without trust"
    **You're seeing:**
    ```
    WARNING - MCP client authentication is disabled but trust_proxy_auth is not set
    ```

    **Solution:** Set `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` to acknowledge proxy authentication.

??? question "WebSocket connections fail"
    **Common causes:**

    1. Proxy not passing headers on WebSocket upgrade
    2. Missing WebSocket support in proxy

    **nginx fix:**
    ```nginx
    location /ws {
        proxy_pass http://mcp-gateway:4444;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
        proxy_set_header Connection "upgrade";
        proxy_set_header X-Authenticated-User $remote_user;
    }
    ```

??? question "How to handle multiple authentication methods?"
    **Use virtual servers with different auth configs:**

    ```yaml
    # Server 1: Proxy auth
    - name: internal-server
      auth_mode: proxy
      proxy_header: X-Employee-Id

    # Server 2: JWT auth
    - name: external-server
      auth_mode: jwt
      jwt_audience: external-clients
    ```

## Migration Guide

### From JWT to Proxy Authentication

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Phase 1: Preparation"
        A1[Document Current Auth] --> A2[Deploy Proxy]
        A2 --> A3[Test Proxy Auth]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 2: Dual Mode"
        B1[Enable Both Auth] --> B2[Migrate Clients]
        B2 --> B3[Monitor Logs]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 3: Proxy Only"
        C1[Disable JWT Auth] --> C2[Remove JWT Code]
        C2 --> C3[Document Change]
    end

    A3 --> B1
    B3 --> C1
```

#### Step-by-Step Migration

=== "Step 1: Deploy Proxy"
    ```bash
    # Deploy auth proxy alongside existing setup
    docker-compose up -d oauth2-proxy

    # Test proxy authentication
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         http://localhost:4180/health
    ```

=== "Step 2: Enable Dual Mode"
    ```bash
    # Keep JWT auth but allow proxy headers
    MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=true
    TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
    PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Auth-Request-Email
    ```

=== "Step 3: Test Both Methods"
    ```bash
    # Test JWT (existing)
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $JWT_TOKEN" \
         http://localhost:4444/tools

    # Test proxy header (new)
    curl -H "X-Auth-Request-Email: user@example.com" \
         http://localhost:4444/tools
    ```

=== "Step 4: Switch to Proxy Only"
    ```bash
    # Disable JWT authentication
    MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
    TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true

    # Restart gateway
    docker-compose restart mcp-gateway
    ```

## Performance Considerations

### Caching User Identity

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "With Caching"
        Proxy1[Auth Proxy] --> Cache{Redis Cache}
        Cache -->|Hit| Gateway1[MCP Gateway]
        Cache -->|Miss| IDP1[IDP]
        IDP1 --> Cache
    end

    subgraph "Without Caching"
        Proxy2[Auth Proxy] --> IDP2[IDP]
        IDP2 --> Gateway2[MCP Gateway]
    end

    style Cache fill:#9f9,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

Configure Redis caching for better performance:

```bash
# Enable Redis cache
CACHE_TYPE=redis
REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0

# Cache user sessions
SESSION_TTL=3600  # 1 hour
```

## Monitoring

### Key Metrics

| Metric | Description | Alert Threshold |
|--------|-------------|-----------------|
| `mcp_auth_failures_total` | Failed authentication attempts | > 10/min |
| `mcp_proxy_header_missing` | Requests without proxy header | > 5/min |
| `mcp_auth_latency_seconds` | Authentication processing time | > 1s p99 |

### Grafana Dashboard

```json title="grafana-dashboard.json"
{
  "dashboard": {
    "title": "MCP Gateway - Proxy Auth",
    "panels": [
      {
        "title": "Auth Success Rate",
        "targets": [{
          "expr": "rate(mcp_auth_success_total[5m]) / rate(mcp_auth_attempts_total[5m])"
        }]
      },
      {
        "title": "Users by Proxy Header",
        "targets": [{
          "expr": "count by (user) (mcp_authenticated_requests_total)"
        }]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Best Practices

!!! tip "Production Checklist"

    - [ ] Network isolation between proxy and gateway
    - [ ] TLS encryption for all connections
    - [ ] Rate limiting at proxy level
    - [ ] Audit logging enabled
    - [ ] Monitoring and alerting configured
    - [ ] Backup authentication method available
    - [ ] Documentation updated
    - [ ] Security review completed

## Related Documentation

- [Authentication Overview](./securing.md)
- [Security Best Practices](../architecture/security-features.md)
- [Deployment Guide](../deployment/index.md)
- [Federation Setup](../architecture/index.md)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/proxy.md, after:

# Proxy Authentication

Configure ContextForge to work with authentication proxies for enterprise deployments.

## Overview

ContextForge supports proxy authentication, allowing you to disable built-in JWT authentication and rely on an upstream authentication proxy. This is essential for enterprise deployments where authentication is centralized through OAuth2, SAML, or other identity providers.

## Architecture

### Standard JWT Authentication Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant Gateway as ContextForge
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    Client->>Client: Generate JWT Token
    Client->>Gateway: Request + Bearer Token
    Gateway->>Gateway: Validate JWT
    alt Valid Token
        Gateway->>MCP: Forward Request
        MCP-->>Gateway: Response
        Gateway-->>Client: Response
    else Invalid Token
        Gateway-->>Client: 401 Unauthorized
    end
```

### Proxy Authentication Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Proxy as Auth Proxy
    participant IDP as Identity Provider
    participant Gateway as ContextForge
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    User->>Proxy: Request
    Proxy->>IDP: Validate Session
    IDP-->>Proxy: User Identity
    Proxy->>Gateway: Request + X-Authenticated-User
    Gateway->>Gateway: Extract User from Header
    Gateway->>MCP: Forward Request
    MCP-->>Gateway: Response
    Gateway-->>Proxy: Response
    Proxy-->>User: Response
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED` | `true` | Enable/disable JWT authentication for MCP operations |
| `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH` | `false` | Trust proxy authentication headers (required when `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false`) |
| `PROXY_USER_HEADER` | `X-Authenticated-User` | Header containing authenticated username from proxy |
| `AUTH_REQUIRED` | `true` | Controls admin UI authentication (independent of MCP auth) |

!!! warning "Security Notice"
    Only set `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false` when ContextForge is deployed behind a trusted authentication proxy. Setting `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` explicitly acknowledges this security requirement.

### Basic Configuration

```bash title=".env"
# Disable MCP client JWT authentication
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false

# Trust proxy authentication headers
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true

# Header containing authenticated user
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User

# Keep admin UI protected (uses email/password authentication)
AUTH_REQUIRED=true
PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL=admin@example.com
PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD=secure-password
```

!!! info "Admin UI Authentication"
    The Admin UI uses email/password authentication (`PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL`/`PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD`), not Basic auth. Basic authentication for API endpoints is disabled by default for security.

## Deployment Patterns

### Pattern 1: OAuth2 Proxy

```mermaid
graph LR
    User[User] -->|HTTPS| LB[Load Balancer]
    LB --> OAuth[OAuth2 Proxy]
    OAuth -->|X-Auth-Request-User| Gateway[ContextForge]
    Gateway --> MCP1[MCP Server 1]
    Gateway --> MCP2[MCP Server 2]

    OAuth -.->|OAuth Flow| IDP[Google/GitHub/etc]

    style OAuth fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Docker Compose Example

```yaml title="docker-compose.yml"
version: '3.8'

services:
  oauth2-proxy:
    image: quay.io/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy:v7.5.0
    command:

      - --http-address=0.0.0.0:4180
      - --upstream=http://mcp-gateway:4444
      - --email-domain=*
      - --pass-user-headers=true
      - --set-xauthrequest=true
      - --skip-provider-button=true
    environment:
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: ${OAUTH_CLIENT_ID}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: ${OAUTH_CLIENT_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${COOKIE_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PROVIDER: google
    ports:

      - "4180:4180"
    networks:

      - mcp-network

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/contingentai/mcp-gateway:latest
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: "false"
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: "true"
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: "X-Auth-Request-Email"
      AUTH_REQUIRED: "true"
      BASIC_AUTH_USER: ${ADMIN_USER}
      BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD: ${ADMIN_PASSWORD}
      DATABASE_URL: postgresql+psycopg://postgres:password@db:5432/mcp
    depends_on:

      - db
    networks:

      - mcp-network

  db:
    image: postgres:15
    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: mcp
      POSTGRES_USER: postgres
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: password
    volumes:

      - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    networks:

      - mcp-network

networks:
  mcp-network:
    driver: bridge

volumes:
  postgres_data:
```

### Pattern 2: Kubernetes with Istio

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Kubernetes Cluster"
        subgraph "Istio Service Mesh"
            IG[Istio Gateway] --> VS[Virtual Service]
            VS --> AuthZ[Authorization Policy]
            AuthZ --> Gateway[ContextForge Pod]
        end

        Gateway --> MCP1[MCP Server Pod 1]
        Gateway --> MCP2[MCP Server Pod 2]

        OIDC[OIDC Provider] -.->|JWT Validation| AuthZ
    end

    User[User] -->|HTTPS + JWT| IG

    style AuthZ fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Kubernetes Manifests

```yaml title="mcp-gateway-deployment.yaml"
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway
  namespace: mcp-system
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: mcp-gateway
        version: v1
    spec:
      containers:

      - name: mcp-gateway
        image: ghcr.io/contingentai/mcp-gateway:latest
        env:

        - name: MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED
          value: "false"

        - name: TRUST_PROXY_AUTH
          value: "true"

        - name: PROXY_USER_HEADER
          value: "X-User-Id"

        - name: DATABASE_URL
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: mcp-gateway-secrets
              key: database-url
        ports:

        - containerPort: 4444
          name: http
        livenessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: http
          initialDelaySeconds: 30
          periodSeconds: 10
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /ready
            port: http
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 5
```

```yaml title="istio-authorization.yaml"
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: RequestAuthentication
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-jwt
  namespace: mcp-system
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  jwtRules:

  - issuer: "https://accounts.google.com"
    jwksUri: "https://www.googleapis.com/oauth2/v3/certs"
    outputPayloadToHeader: "X-User-Id"
---
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: AuthorizationPolicy
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-authz
  namespace: mcp-system
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  action: ALLOW
  rules:

  - from:
    - source:
        requestPrincipals: ["*"]
```

### Pattern 3: API Gateway (Kong)

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Kong API Gateway"
        Plugin[OIDC Plugin] --> Route[Route]
        Route --> Service[Service]
    end

    User[User] -->|HTTPS| Plugin
    Service -->|X-Consumer-Username| Gateway[ContextForge]
    Gateway --> MCP[MCP Servers]

    Plugin -.->|OIDC Flow| IDP[Keycloak/Auth0]

    style Plugin fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

#### Kong Configuration

```yaml title="kong-config.yaml"
services:

  - name: mcp-gateway
    url: http://mcp-gateway:4444
    routes:

      - name: mcp-route
        paths:

          - /mcp
    plugins:

      - name: oidc
        config:
          client_id: mcp-client
          client_secret: ${OIDC_SECRET}
          discovery: https://auth.example.com/.well-known/openid-configuration
          introspection_endpoint: https://auth.example.com/introspect
          bearer_only: "yes"
          realm: mcp-gateway
          header_names:

            - X-Consumer-Username:preferred_username
            - X-Consumer-Id:sub
```

## Common Proxy Configurations

### Authelia

```yaml title="authelia-config.yml"
authentication_backend:
  ldap:
    url: ldaps://ldap.example.com
    base_dn: dc=example,dc=com

access_control:
  default_policy: deny
  rules:

    - domain: mcp.example.com
      policy: two_factor
      subject:

        - group:mcp-users

# Headers forwarded to backend
authorization:
  headers:
    Remote-User: username
    Remote-Email: email
    Remote-Groups: groups
```

ContextForge configuration:
```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=Remote-User
```

### Cloudflare Access

```mermaid
graph LR
    User[User] -->|HTTPS| CF[Cloudflare Edge]
    CF -->|Cf-Access-Jwt-Assertion| Gateway[ContextForge]

    CF -.->|SAML/OIDC| IDP[Identity Provider]

    style CF fill:#f90,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

Configuration:
```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=Cf-Access-Authenticated-User-Email
```

### AWS ALB with Cognito

```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Amzn-Oidc-Identity
```

## Header Passthrough

When using proxy authentication, you often need to pass additional headers to downstream MCP servers:

```bash
# Enable header passthrough
ENABLE_HEADER_PASSTHROUGH=true

# Optional: Enable overwriting of base headers (advanced usage)
ENABLE_OVERWRITE_BASE_HEADERS=false

# Headers to pass through (JSON array)
DEFAULT_PASSTHROUGH_HEADERS='["X-Tenant-Id", "X-Request-Id", "X-Authenticated-User", "X-Groups"]'
```

### X-Upstream-Authorization Header

When ContextForge uses authentication (JWT/Bearer/Basic/OAuth), clients face an Authorization header conflict when trying to pass different auth to upstream MCP servers.

**Problem**: You need one `Authorization` header for gateway auth and a different one for upstream MCP servers.

**Solution**: Use the `X-Upstream-Authorization` header, which the gateway automatically renames to `Authorization` when forwarding to upstream servers.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant Gateway as ContextForge
    participant MCP as MCP Server

    Client->>Gateway: Authorization: Bearer gateway_token<br/>X-Upstream-Authorization: Bearer upstream_token
    Gateway->>Gateway: Validate gateway_token
    Gateway->>MCP: Authorization: Bearer upstream_token<br/>(X-Upstream-Authorization renamed)
    MCP-->>Gateway: Response
    Gateway-->>Client: Response
```

#### Example Usage

```bash
# Client authenticates to gateway with one token
# and passes different auth to upstream MCP server
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $GATEWAY_JWT" \
     -H "X-Upstream-Authorization: Bearer $MCP_SERVER_TOKEN" \
     -X POST http://localhost:4444/tools/invoke/github_create_issue \
     -d '{"arguments": {"title": "New Issue"}}'
```

#### Configuration

This feature is automatically enabled when the gateway uses authentication:

```bash
# Any of these auth methods enable X-Upstream-Authorization handling
AUTH_REQUIRED=true
BASIC_AUTH_USER=admin
JWT_SECRET_KEY=your-secret

# Or OAuth-enabled gateways
# oauth_config in gateway configuration
```

The gateway will always process `X-Upstream-Authorization` headers when:

1. The gateway itself uses authentication (`auth_type` in ["basic", "bearer", "oauth"])
2. The header value passes security validation

**Note**: `X-Upstream-Authorization` processing is independent of the `ENABLE_HEADER_PASSTHROUGH` flag and always works when the gateway uses authentication.

#### Security Notes

- Headers are sanitized before forwarding
- Only processed when gateway authentication is enabled
- Failed sanitization logs warnings but doesn't block requests
- Provides clean separation between gateway and upstream authentication

## Security Considerations

### Network Isolation

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "DMZ"
        WAF[WAF] --> LB[Load Balancer]
        LB --> Proxy[Auth Proxy]
    end

    subgraph "Private Network"
        Proxy -->|Internal Only| Gateway[ContextForge]
        Gateway --> MCP1[MCP Server 1]
        Gateway --> MCP2[MCP Server 2]
    end

    Internet[Internet] -->|HTTPS| WAF

    style Proxy fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Gateway fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

!!! danger "Critical Security Requirements"

    1. **Never expose ContextForge directly** to the internet when proxy auth is enabled
    2. **Use TLS** for all communication between proxy and gateway
    3. **Implement network policies** to ensure only the proxy can reach the gateway
    4. **Validate proxy certificates** in production environments
    5. **Monitor authentication logs** for suspicious activity

### Recommended Security Headers

Configure your proxy to add these security headers:

```nginx title="nginx.conf"
# Security headers
add_header X-Frame-Options "DENY" always;
add_header X-Content-Type-Options "nosniff" always;
add_header X-XSS-Protection "1; mode=block" always;
add_header Referrer-Policy "strict-origin-when-cross-origin" always;
add_header Content-Security-Policy "default-src 'self'" always;

# Remove sensitive headers
proxy_hide_header X-Powered-By;
proxy_hide_header Server;

# Pass authentication headers
proxy_set_header X-Authenticated-User $remote_user;
proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
```

## Testing

### Verify Configuration

```bash
# Test without authentication (should fail or return anonymous)
curl -v http://localhost:4444/tools

# Test with proxy header
curl -H "X-Authenticated-User: john.doe@example.com" \
     http://localhost:4444/tools

# Test WebSocket with proxy header
wscat -c ws://localhost:4444/ws \
      -H "X-Authenticated-User: john.doe@example.com"
```

### Health Checks

Configure your load balancer to use these endpoints:

| Endpoint | Purpose | Expected Response |
|----------|---------|-------------------|
| `/health` | Liveness probe | 200 OK |
| `/ready` | Readiness probe | 200 OK when ready |
| `/metrics` | Prometheus metrics | Metrics in text format |

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

??? question "Getting 401 Unauthorized with proxy headers"
    **Check these settings:**

    1. Verify `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false`
    2. Ensure `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true`
    3. Confirm header name matches `PROXY_USER_HEADER`
    4. Check proxy is sending the header:
    ```bash
    # Debug headers being received
    curl -H "X-Authenticated-User: test" \
         http://localhost:4444/version -v
    ```

??? question "Warning: MCP auth disabled without trust"
    **You're seeing:**
    ```
    WARNING - MCP client authentication is disabled but trust_proxy_auth is not set
    ```

    **Solution:** Set `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` to acknowledge proxy authentication.

??? question "WebSocket connections fail"
    **Common causes:**

    1. Proxy not passing headers on WebSocket upgrade
    2. Missing WebSocket support in proxy

    **nginx fix:**
    ```nginx
    location /ws {
        proxy_pass http://mcp-gateway:4444;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
        proxy_set_header Connection "upgrade";
        proxy_set_header X-Authenticated-User $remote_user;
    }
    ```

??? question "How to handle multiple authentication methods?"
    **Use virtual servers with different auth configs:**

    ```yaml
    # Server 1: Proxy auth
    - name: internal-server
      auth_mode: proxy
      proxy_header: X-Employee-Id

    # Server 2: JWT auth
    - name: external-server
      auth_mode: jwt
      jwt_audience: external-clients
    ```

## Migration Guide

### From JWT to Proxy Authentication

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Phase 1: Preparation"
        A1[Document Current Auth] --> A2[Deploy Proxy]
        A2 --> A3[Test Proxy Auth]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 2: Dual Mode"
        B1[Enable Both Auth] --> B2[Migrate Clients]
        B2 --> B3[Monitor Logs]
    end

    subgraph "Phase 3: Proxy Only"
        C1[Disable JWT Auth] --> C2[Remove JWT Code]
        C2 --> C3[Document Change]
    end

    A3 --> B1
    B3 --> C1
```

#### Step-by-Step Migration

=== "Step 1: Deploy Proxy"
    ```bash
    # Deploy auth proxy alongside existing setup
    docker-compose up -d oauth2-proxy

    # Test proxy authentication
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         http://localhost:4180/health
    ```

=== "Step 2: Enable Dual Mode"
    ```bash
    # Keep JWT auth but allow proxy headers
    MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=true
    TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
    PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Auth-Request-Email
    ```

=== "Step 3: Test Both Methods"
    ```bash
    # Test JWT (existing)
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $JWT_TOKEN" \
         http://localhost:4444/tools

    # Test proxy header (new)
    curl -H "X-Auth-Request-Email: user@example.com" \
         http://localhost:4444/tools
    ```

=== "Step 4: Switch to Proxy Only"
    ```bash
    # Disable JWT authentication
    MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
    TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true

    # Restart gateway
    docker-compose restart mcp-gateway
    ```

## Performance Considerations

### Caching User Identity

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "With Caching"
        Proxy1[Auth Proxy] --> Cache{Redis Cache}
        Cache -->|Hit| Gateway1[ContextForge]
        Cache -->|Miss| IDP1[IDP]
        IDP1 --> Cache
    end

    subgraph "Without Caching"
        Proxy2[Auth Proxy] --> IDP2[IDP]
        IDP2 --> Gateway2[ContextForge]
    end

    style Cache fill:#9f9,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

Configure Redis caching for better performance:

```bash
# Enable Redis cache
CACHE_TYPE=redis
REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0

# Cache user sessions
SESSION_TTL=3600  # 1 hour
```

## Monitoring

### Key Metrics

| Metric | Description | Alert Threshold |
|--------|-------------|-----------------|
| `mcp_auth_failures_total` | Failed authentication attempts | > 10/min |
| `mcp_proxy_header_missing` | Requests without proxy header | > 5/min |
| `mcp_auth_latency_seconds` | Authentication processing time | > 1s p99 |

### Grafana Dashboard

```json title="grafana-dashboard.json"
{
  "dashboard": {
    "title": "ContextForge - Proxy Auth",
    "panels": [
      {
        "title": "Auth Success Rate",
        "targets": [{
          "expr": "rate(mcp_auth_success_total[5m]) / rate(mcp_auth_attempts_total[5m])"
        }]
      },
      {
        "title": "Users by Proxy Header",
        "targets": [{
          "expr": "count by (user) (mcp_authenticated_requests_total)"
        }]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Best Practices

!!! tip "Production Checklist"

    - [ ] Network isolation between proxy and gateway
    - [ ] TLS encryption for all connections
    - [ ] Rate limiting at proxy level
    - [ ] Audit logging enabled
    - [ ] Monitoring and alerting configured
    - [ ] Backup authentication method available
    - [ ] Documentation updated
    - [ ] Security review completed

## Related Documentation

- [Authentication Overview](./securing.md)
- [Security Best Practices](../architecture/security-features.md)
- [Deployment Guide](../deployment/index.md)
- [Federation Setup](../architecture/index.md)
