docs/docs/manage/sso-github-tutorial.md, before:

# GitHub SSO Setup Tutorial

This tutorial walks you through setting up GitHub Single Sign-On (SSO) authentication for MCP Gateway, allowing users to log in with their GitHub accounts.

## Prerequisites

- MCP Gateway installed and running
- GitHub account with admin access to create OAuth apps
- Access to your gateway's environment configuration

## Step 1: Create GitHub OAuth Application

### 1.1 Navigate to GitHub Settings

1. Log into GitHub and go to **Settings** (click your profile picture → Settings)
2. In the left sidebar, click **Developer settings**
3. Click **OAuth Apps**
4. Click **New OAuth App**

### 1.2 Configure OAuth Application

Fill out the OAuth application form:

**Application name**: `MCP Gateway - [Your Organization]`

- Example: `MCP Gateway - Acme Corp`

**Homepage URL**: Your gateway's public URL

- Production: `https://gateway.yourcompany.com`
- Development (port 8000): `http://localhost:8000`
- Development (make serve, port 4444): `http://localhost:4444`

**Application description** (optional):
```
Model Context Protocol Gateway SSO Authentication
```

**Authorization callback URL**: **This is critical - must be exact**
```
# Production
https://gateway.yourcompany.com/auth/sso/callback/github

# Development (port 8000)
http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/callback/github

# Development (make serve, port 4444)
http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github
```

**Important**: The callback URL must match your gateway's actual port and protocol exactly.

### 1.3 Generate Client Secret

1. Click **Register application**
2. Note the **Client ID** (visible immediately)
3. Click **Generate a new client secret**
4. **Important**: Copy the client secret immediately - you won't see it again
5. Store both Client ID and Client Secret securely

## Step 2: Configure MCP Gateway Environment

### 2.1 Update Environment Variables

Add these variables to your `.env` file:

```bash
# Enable SSO System
SSO_ENABLED=true

# GitHub OAuth Configuration
SSO_GITHUB_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID=Iv1.a1b2c3d4e5f6g7h8
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET=ghp_1234567890abcdef1234567890abcdef12345678

# Optional: Auto-create users on first login
SSO_AUTO_CREATE_USERS=true

# Optional: Restrict to specific email domains
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com", "contractor.org"]

# Optional: Preserve local admin authentication
SSO_PRESERVE_ADMIN_AUTH=true
```

### 2.2 Example Production Configuration

```bash
# Production GitHub SSO Setup
SSO_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID=Iv1.real-client-id-from-github
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET=ghp_real-secret-from-github

# Security settings
SSO_AUTO_CREATE_USERS=true
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com"]
SSO_PRESERVE_ADMIN_AUTH=true

# Optional: GitHub organization team mapping
GITHUB_ORG_TEAM_MAPPING={"your-github-org": "dev-team-uuid"}
```

### 2.3 Development Configuration

```bash
# Development GitHub SSO Setup
SSO_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID=Iv1.dev-client-id
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET=ghp_dev-secret

# More permissive for testing
SSO_AUTO_CREATE_USERS=true
SSO_PRESERVE_ADMIN_AUTH=true
```

## Step 3: Restart and Verify Gateway

### 3.1 Restart the Gateway

```bash
# Development
make dev

# Or directly with uvicorn
uvicorn mcpgateway.main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000

# Production
make serve
```

### 3.2 Verify SSO is Enabled

Test that SSO endpoints are accessible:

```bash
# For development server (port 8000)
curl -X GET http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/providers

# For production server (port 4444, make serve)
curl -X GET http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/providers

# Should return GitHub provider:
[
  {
    "id": "github",
    "name": "github",
    "display_name": "GitHub",
    "authorization_url": null
  }
]
```

**Troubleshooting**:

- **404 error**: Check that `SSO_ENABLED=true` in your environment and restart gateway
- **Empty array `[]`**: SSO is enabled but GitHub provider not created - restart gateway to auto-bootstrap
- **Connection refused**: Gateway not running or wrong port

## Step 4: Test GitHub SSO Login

### 4.1 Access Login Page

1. Navigate to your gateway's login page:

   - Development (port 8000): `http://localhost:8000/admin/login`
   - Development (make serve, port 4444): `http://localhost:4444/admin/login`
   - Production: `https://gateway.yourcompany.com/admin/login`

2. You should see a "Continue with GitHub" button

### 4.2 Test Authentication Flow

1. Click **Continue with GitHub**
2. You'll be redirected to GitHub's authorization page
3. Click **Authorize** to grant access
4. You'll be redirected back to the gateway admin panel
5. You should be logged in successfully

### 4.3 Verify User Creation

Check that a user was created in the gateway:

```bash
# Using the admin API (requires admin token)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:8000/auth/users

# Look for your GitHub email in the user list
```

## Step 5: Advanced Configuration (Optional)

### 5.1 GitHub Organization Team Mapping

Map GitHub organizations to gateway teams:

```bash
# Environment variable format
GITHUB_ORG_TEAM_MAPPING={"your-github-org": "dev-team-uuid", "admin-org": "admin-team-uuid"}
```

Create teams first using the admin API:

```bash
# Create a team
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/teams \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "GitHub Developers",
    "description": "Users from GitHub organization"
  }'
```

### 5.2 Custom OAuth Scopes

Request additional GitHub permissions:

```bash
# Add to .env
SSO_GITHUB_SCOPE="user:email read:org"
```

### 5.3 Trusted Domains Restriction

Only allow users from specific email domains:

```bash
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com", "contractor.com"]
```

Users with emails from other domains will be blocked.

## Step 6: Production Deployment Checklist

### 6.1 Security Requirements

- [ ] Use HTTPS for all callback URLs
- [ ] Store client secrets in secure vault/secret management
- [ ] Set restrictive `SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS`
- [ ] Enable audit logging
- [ ] Regular secret rotation schedule

### 6.2 Callback URL Verification

Ensure callback URLs match exactly:

**GitHub OAuth App**: `https://gateway.yourcompany.com/auth/sso/callback/github`
**Gateway Config**: Gateway must be accessible at `https://gateway.yourcompany.com`

### 6.3 Firewall and Network

- [ ] Gateway accessible from internet (for GitHub callbacks)
- [ ] HTTPS certificates valid and auto-renewing
- [ ] CDN/load balancer configured if needed

## Troubleshooting

### Error: "SSO authentication is disabled"

**Problem**: SSO endpoints return 404
**Solution**: Set `SSO_ENABLED=true` and restart gateway

```bash
# Check environment
echo $SSO_ENABLED

# Should output: true
```

### Error: "The redirect_uri is not associated with this application"

**Problem**: GitHub OAuth app callback URL doesn't match your gateway's actual URL
**Solution**: Update GitHub OAuth app settings to match your gateway's port and protocol

```bash
# For make serve (port 4444):
Homepage URL: http://localhost:4444
Authorization callback URL: http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github

# For development server (port 8000):
Homepage URL: http://localhost:8000
Authorization callback URL: http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/callback/github

# Common mistakes:
http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github/  # Extra slash
http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/callback/github  # Wrong port (when using 4444)
https://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github # HTTPS on localhost
```

### Error: Missing query parameters (code, state)

**Problem**: Direct access to callback URL without OAuth flow
**Solution**: Don't navigate directly to `/auth/sso/callback/github` - use the "Continue with GitHub" button

### Error: "User creation failed"

**Problem**: User's email domain not in trusted domains
**Solution**: Add domain to `SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS` or remove restriction

```bash
# Add user's domain
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com", "user-domain.com"]

# Or remove restriction entirely
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=[]
```

### Error: No GitHub button appears

**Problem**: JavaScript fails to load SSO providers
**Solution**: Check browser console and Content Security Policy

```bash
# Check if providers endpoint works
curl http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/providers

# Check browser console for CSP violations
```

### GitHub Authorization Returns Error

**Problem**: GitHub shows "Application suspended" or similar
**Solution**: Check GitHub OAuth app status and limits

1. Go to GitHub Settings → Developer settings → OAuth Apps
2. Check if your app is suspended or has issues
3. Verify callback URL is correct
4. Check if you've exceeded rate limits

### Users Can't Access After Login

**Problem**: User logs in successfully but has no permissions
**Solution**: Assign users to teams or roles

```bash
# List users to find the GitHub user
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:8000/auth/users

# Assign user to a team
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/teams/TEAM_ID/members \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"user_id": "USER_ID", "role": "member"}'
```

## Testing Checklist

- [ ] GitHub OAuth app created and configured
- [ ] Environment variables set correctly
- [ ] Gateway restarted with new config
- [ ] `/auth/sso/providers` returns GitHub provider
- [ ] Login page shows "Continue with GitHub" button
- [ ] Clicking GitHub button redirects to GitHub
- [ ] GitHub authorization redirects back successfully
- [ ] User is logged into gateway admin panel
- [ ] User appears in gateway user list

## Next Steps

After GitHub SSO is working:

1. **Set up additional providers** (Google, Okta, IBM Verify)
2. **Configure team mappings** for automatic role assignment
3. **Set up monitoring** for authentication failures
4. **Configure backup authentication** methods
5. **Document user onboarding** process for your organization

## Related Documentation

- [Complete SSO Guide](sso.md) - Full SSO documentation
- [Team Management](teams.md) - Managing teams and roles
- [RBAC Configuration](rbac.md) - Role-based access control
- [Security Best Practices](../architecture/security-features.md)

## Support

If you encounter issues:

1. Check the [Troubleshooting section](#troubleshooting) above
2. Enable debug logging: `LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG`
3. Review gateway logs for SSO-related errors
4. Verify GitHub OAuth app configuration matches exactly

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/sso-github-tutorial.md, after:

# GitHub SSO Setup Tutorial

This tutorial walks you through setting up GitHub Single Sign-On (SSO) authentication for ContextForge, allowing users to log in with their GitHub accounts.

## Prerequisites

- ContextForge installed and running
- GitHub account with admin access to create OAuth apps
- Access to your gateway's environment configuration

## Step 1: Create GitHub OAuth Application

### 1.1 Navigate to GitHub Settings

1. Log into GitHub and go to **Settings** (click your profile picture → Settings)
2. In the left sidebar, click **Developer settings**
3. Click **OAuth Apps**
4. Click **New OAuth App**

### 1.2 Configure OAuth Application

Fill out the OAuth application form:

**Application name**: `ContextForge - [Your Organization]`

- Example: `ContextForge - Acme Corp`

**Homepage URL**: Your gateway's public URL

- Production: `https://gateway.yourcompany.com`
- Development (port 8000): `http://localhost:8000`
- Development (make serve, port 4444): `http://localhost:4444`

**Application description** (optional):
```
Model Context Protocol Gateway SSO Authentication
```

**Authorization callback URL**: **This is critical - must be exact**
```
# Production
https://gateway.yourcompany.com/auth/sso/callback/github

# Development (port 8000)
http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/callback/github

# Development (make serve, port 4444)
http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github
```

**Important**: The callback URL must match your gateway's actual port and protocol exactly.

### 1.3 Generate Client Secret

1. Click **Register application**
2. Note the **Client ID** (visible immediately)
3. Click **Generate a new client secret**
4. **Important**: Copy the client secret immediately - you won't see it again
5. Store both Client ID and Client Secret securely

## Step 2: Configure ContextForge Environment

### 2.1 Update Environment Variables

Add these variables to your `.env` file:

```bash
# Enable SSO System
SSO_ENABLED=true

# GitHub OAuth Configuration
SSO_GITHUB_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID=Iv1.a1b2c3d4e5f6g7h8
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET=ghp_1234567890abcdef1234567890abcdef12345678

# Optional: Auto-create users on first login
SSO_AUTO_CREATE_USERS=true

# Optional: Restrict to specific email domains
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com", "contractor.org"]

# Optional: Preserve local admin authentication
SSO_PRESERVE_ADMIN_AUTH=true
```

### 2.2 Example Production Configuration

```bash
# Production GitHub SSO Setup
SSO_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID=Iv1.real-client-id-from-github
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET=ghp_real-secret-from-github

# Security settings
SSO_AUTO_CREATE_USERS=true
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com"]
SSO_PRESERVE_ADMIN_AUTH=true

# Optional: GitHub organization team mapping
GITHUB_ORG_TEAM_MAPPING={"your-github-org": "dev-team-uuid"}
```

### 2.3 Development Configuration

```bash
# Development GitHub SSO Setup
SSO_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_ENABLED=true
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID=Iv1.dev-client-id
SSO_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET=ghp_dev-secret

# More permissive for testing
SSO_AUTO_CREATE_USERS=true
SSO_PRESERVE_ADMIN_AUTH=true
```

## Step 3: Restart and Verify Gateway

### 3.1 Restart the Gateway

```bash
# Development
make dev

# Or directly with uvicorn
uvicorn mcpgateway.main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000

# Production
make serve
```

### 3.2 Verify SSO is Enabled

Test that SSO endpoints are accessible:

```bash
# For development server (port 8000)
curl -X GET http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/providers

# For production server (port 4444, make serve)
curl -X GET http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/providers

# Should return GitHub provider:
[
  {
    "id": "github",
    "name": "github",
    "display_name": "GitHub",
    "authorization_url": null
  }
]
```

**Troubleshooting**:

- **404 error**: Check that `SSO_ENABLED=true` in your environment and restart gateway
- **Empty array `[]`**: SSO is enabled but GitHub provider not created - restart gateway to auto-bootstrap
- **Connection refused**: Gateway not running or wrong port

## Step 4: Test GitHub SSO Login

### 4.1 Access Login Page

1. Navigate to your gateway's login page:

   - Development (port 8000): `http://localhost:8000/admin/login`
   - Development (make serve, port 4444): `http://localhost:4444/admin/login`
   - Production: `https://gateway.yourcompany.com/admin/login`

2. You should see a "Continue with GitHub" button

### 4.2 Test Authentication Flow

1. Click **Continue with GitHub**
2. You'll be redirected to GitHub's authorization page
3. Click **Authorize** to grant access
4. You'll be redirected back to the gateway admin panel
5. You should be logged in successfully

### 4.3 Verify User Creation

Check that a user was created in the gateway:

```bash
# Using the admin API (requires admin token)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:8000/auth/users

# Look for your GitHub email in the user list
```

## Step 5: Advanced Configuration (Optional)

### 5.1 GitHub Organization Team Mapping

Map GitHub organizations to gateway teams:

```bash
# Environment variable format
GITHUB_ORG_TEAM_MAPPING={"your-github-org": "dev-team-uuid", "admin-org": "admin-team-uuid"}
```

Create teams first using the admin API:

```bash
# Create a team
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/teams \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "GitHub Developers",
    "description": "Users from GitHub organization"
  }'
```

### 5.2 Custom OAuth Scopes

Request additional GitHub permissions:

```bash
# Add to .env
SSO_GITHUB_SCOPE="user:email read:org"
```

### 5.3 Trusted Domains Restriction

Only allow users from specific email domains:

```bash
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com", "contractor.com"]
```

Users with emails from other domains will be blocked.

## Step 6: Production Deployment Checklist

### 6.1 Security Requirements

- [ ] Use HTTPS for all callback URLs
- [ ] Store client secrets in secure vault/secret management
- [ ] Set restrictive `SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS`
- [ ] Enable audit logging
- [ ] Regular secret rotation schedule

### 6.2 Callback URL Verification

Ensure callback URLs match exactly:

**GitHub OAuth App**: `https://gateway.yourcompany.com/auth/sso/callback/github`
**Gateway Config**: Gateway must be accessible at `https://gateway.yourcompany.com`

### 6.3 Firewall and Network

- [ ] Gateway accessible from internet (for GitHub callbacks)
- [ ] HTTPS certificates valid and auto-renewing
- [ ] CDN/load balancer configured if needed

## Troubleshooting

### Error: "SSO authentication is disabled"

**Problem**: SSO endpoints return 404
**Solution**: Set `SSO_ENABLED=true` and restart gateway

```bash
# Check environment
echo $SSO_ENABLED

# Should output: true
```

### Error: "The redirect_uri is not associated with this application"

**Problem**: GitHub OAuth app callback URL doesn't match your gateway's actual URL
**Solution**: Update GitHub OAuth app settings to match your gateway's port and protocol

```bash
# For make serve (port 4444):
Homepage URL: http://localhost:4444
Authorization callback URL: http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github

# For development server (port 8000):
Homepage URL: http://localhost:8000
Authorization callback URL: http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/callback/github

# Common mistakes:
http://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github/  # Extra slash
http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/callback/github  # Wrong port (when using 4444)
https://localhost:4444/auth/sso/callback/github # HTTPS on localhost
```

### Error: Missing query parameters (code, state)

**Problem**: Direct access to callback URL without OAuth flow
**Solution**: Don't navigate directly to `/auth/sso/callback/github` - use the "Continue with GitHub" button

### Error: "User creation failed"

**Problem**: User's email domain not in trusted domains
**Solution**: Add domain to `SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS` or remove restriction

```bash
# Add user's domain
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=["yourcompany.com", "user-domain.com"]

# Or remove restriction entirely
SSO_TRUSTED_DOMAINS=[]
```

### Error: No GitHub button appears

**Problem**: JavaScript fails to load SSO providers
**Solution**: Check browser console and Content Security Policy

```bash
# Check if providers endpoint works
curl http://localhost:8000/auth/sso/providers

# Check browser console for CSP violations
```

### GitHub Authorization Returns Error

**Problem**: GitHub shows "Application suspended" or similar
**Solution**: Check GitHub OAuth app status and limits

1. Go to GitHub Settings → Developer settings → OAuth Apps
2. Check if your app is suspended or has issues
3. Verify callback URL is correct
4. Check if you've exceeded rate limits

### Users Can't Access After Login

**Problem**: User logs in successfully but has no permissions
**Solution**: Assign users to teams or roles

```bash
# List users to find the GitHub user
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:8000/auth/users

# Assign user to a team
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/teams/TEAM_ID/members \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ADMIN_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"user_id": "USER_ID", "role": "member"}'
```

## Testing Checklist

- [ ] GitHub OAuth app created and configured
- [ ] Environment variables set correctly
- [ ] Gateway restarted with new config
- [ ] `/auth/sso/providers` returns GitHub provider
- [ ] Login page shows "Continue with GitHub" button
- [ ] Clicking GitHub button redirects to GitHub
- [ ] GitHub authorization redirects back successfully
- [ ] User is logged into gateway admin panel
- [ ] User appears in gateway user list

## Next Steps

After GitHub SSO is working:

1. **Set up additional providers** (Google, Okta, IBM Verify)
2. **Configure team mappings** for automatic role assignment
3. **Set up monitoring** for authentication failures
4. **Configure backup authentication** methods
5. **Document user onboarding** process for your organization

## Related Documentation

- [Complete SSO Guide](sso.md) - Full SSO documentation
- [Team Management](teams.md) - Managing teams and roles
- [RBAC Configuration](rbac.md) - Role-based access control
- [Security Best Practices](../architecture/security-features.md)

## Support

If you encounter issues:

1. Check the [Troubleshooting section](#troubleshooting) above
2. Enable debug logging: `LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG`
3. Review gateway logs for SSO-related errors
4. Verify GitHub OAuth app configuration matches exactly
