docs/docs/manage/supported-databases.md, before:

# Supported Databases

MCP Gateway supports multiple database backends with full feature parity across all supported systems.

## Database Support Matrix

| Database    | Support Level | Production Ready | Connection String Example                                    | Notes                          |
|-------------|---------------|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| SQLite      | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `sqlite:///./mcp.db`                                        | Default, file-based            |
| PostgreSQL  | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `postgresql+psycopg://postgres:changeme@localhost:5432/mcp` | Recommended for production     |
| MariaDB     | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `mysql+pymysql://mysql:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp`         | **36+ tables**, MariaDB 10.6+ |
| MySQL       | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `mysql+pymysql://admin:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp`         | Alternative MySQL variant      |

## MariaDB/MySQL Configuration

### Connection String Format

```bash
# MariaDB (recommended)
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://[username]:[password]@[host]:[port]/[database]

# Examples:
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://mysql:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://admin:secret123@mariadb.example.com:3306/mcpgateway
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://mcpuser:mypassword@192.168.1.100:3306/mcp_production
```

### Version Requirements

- **MariaDB**: 10.6+ (recommended)
- **MySQL**: 8.0+ (supported)

### Driver Requirements

The `pymysql` driver is included by default in all MCP Gateway installations:

```bash
# Already included - no additional installation needed
pip install mcp-contextforge-gateway
```

### Database Schema Compatibility

MCP Gateway's database schema is fully compatible with MariaDB/MySQL:

- **36+ database tables** work perfectly with MariaDB 10.6+ and MySQL 8.0+
- All **VARCHAR length issues** have been resolved for MariaDB/MySQL compatibility
- Complete feature parity with SQLite and PostgreSQL
- Supports all MCP Gateway features including federation, caching, and A2A agents

## Known Limitations

### MariaDB/MySQL Specific Limitations

1. **No Partial JSONPath Index Support**

   - MariaDB/MySQL do not support partial indexes on JSON paths
   - Full table scans may occur for complex JSON queries
   - **Workaround**: Use additional indexed columns for frequently queried JSON fields

2. **Foreign Key Length Constraints**

   - Foreign key column names are limited to 64 characters
   - Some composite foreign keys may require shorter naming
   - **Impact**: Minimal - affects only internal schema design

3. **Case Sensitivity**

   - Table and column names are case-sensitive on Linux, case-insensitive on Windows/macOS
   - **Recommendation**: Use consistent lowercase naming for portability

4. **JSON Data Type Differences**

   - MariaDB JSON is stored as LONGTEXT with validation
   - MySQL has native JSON data type with better performance
   - **Impact**: Functional compatibility maintained, performance may vary

### General Database Limitations

1. **SQLite Connection Limits**

   - SQLite is limited to 50 connections in pool (vs 200 for other databases)
   - **Recommendation**: Use PostgreSQL or MariaDB for high-concurrency deployments

2. **MongoDB Schema Flexibility**

   - MongoDB's schemaless nature may allow invalid data structures
   - **Mitigation**: Application-level validation enforced regardless of backend

## Performance Considerations

### MariaDB/MySQL Optimization

```bash
# Recommended connection pool settings for MariaDB/MySQL
DB_POOL_SIZE=200              # Maximum persistent connections
DB_MAX_OVERFLOW=20            # Additional connections beyond pool_size
DB_POOL_TIMEOUT=30            # Seconds to wait for connection
DB_POOL_RECYCLE=3600          # Seconds before recreating connection
```

### Index Optimization

MariaDB/MySQL benefit from these additional indexes for large deployments:

```sql
-- Recommended indexes for high-performance deployments
CREATE INDEX idx_tools_team_created ON tools(team_id, created_at);
CREATE INDEX idx_resources_owner_uri ON resources(owner_email, uri);
CREATE INDEX idx_prompts_team_name ON prompts(team_id, name);
```

## Migration Between Databases

### PostgreSQL to MariaDB Migration

MariaDB is fully compatible with PostgreSQL schemas used by MCP Gateway. Simply update your `DATABASE_URL` to point to MariaDB:

```bash
# Change from PostgreSQL
# DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://postgres:changeme@localhost:5432/mcp

# To MariaDB
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://mysql:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp
```

The gateway will automatically handle schema creation and migrations when started with the new database URL.

### SQLite to MariaDB Migration

```bash
# 1. Export SQLite data
sqlite3 mcp.db .dump > mcp_backup.sql

# 2. Convert SQLite syntax to MySQL
sed -i 's/AUTOINCREMENT/AUTO_INCREMENT/g' mcp_backup.sql
sed -i 's/INTEGER PRIMARY KEY/INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY/g' mcp_backup.sql

# 3. Import to MariaDB
mysql -u mysql -p mcp < mcp_backup.sql
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common MariaDB/MySQL Issues

1. **Connection Refused**
   ```bash
   # Check MariaDB service status
   sudo systemctl status mariadb

   # Verify port is open
   netstat -tlnp | grep 3306
   ```

2. **Authentication Failures**
   ```bash
   # Reset user password
   sudo mariadb -e "ALTER USER 'mysql'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'newpassword';"
   sudo mariadb -e "FLUSH PRIVILEGES;"
   ```

3. **Permission Denied**
   ```bash
   # Grant all privileges
   sudo mariadb -e "GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON mcp.* TO 'mysql'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'changeme';"
   sudo mariadb -e "FLUSH PRIVILEGES;"
   ```

4. **Character Set Issues**
   ```bash
   # Set UTF-8 character set
   sudo mariadb -e "ALTER DATABASE mcp CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci;"
   ```

## Related Documentation

- [Configuration Reference](configuration.md) - Complete database configuration options
- [Docker Compose Deployment](../deployment/compose.md) - MariaDB container setup
- [Kubernetes Deployment](../deployment/kubernetes.md) - MariaDB in Kubernetes
- [Performance Tuning](tuning.md) - Database optimization guidelines

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/supported-databases.md, after:

# Supported Databases

ContextForge supports multiple database backends with full feature parity across all supported systems.

## Database Support Matrix

| Database    | Support Level | Production Ready | Connection String Example                                    | Notes                          |
|-------------|---------------|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| SQLite      | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `sqlite:///./mcp.db`                                        | Default, file-based            |
| PostgreSQL  | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `postgresql+psycopg://postgres:changeme@localhost:5432/mcp` | Recommended for production     |
| MariaDB     | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `mysql+pymysql://mysql:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp`         | **36+ tables**, MariaDB 10.6+ |
| MySQL       | ✅ Full       | ✅ Yes           | `mysql+pymysql://admin:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp`         | Alternative MySQL variant      |

## MariaDB/MySQL Configuration

### Connection String Format

```bash
# MariaDB (recommended)
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://[username]:[password]@[host]:[port]/[database]

# Examples:
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://mysql:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://admin:secret123@mariadb.example.com:3306/mcpgateway
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://mcpuser:mypassword@192.168.1.100:3306/mcp_production
```

### Version Requirements

- **MariaDB**: 10.6+ (recommended)
- **MySQL**: 8.0+ (supported)

### Driver Requirements

The `pymysql` driver is included by default in all ContextForge installations:

```bash
# Already included - no additional installation needed
pip install mcp-contextforge-gateway
```

### Database Schema Compatibility

ContextForge's database schema is fully compatible with MariaDB/MySQL:

- **36+ database tables** work perfectly with MariaDB 10.6+ and MySQL 8.0+
- All **VARCHAR length issues** have been resolved for MariaDB/MySQL compatibility
- Complete feature parity with SQLite and PostgreSQL
- Supports all ContextForge features including federation, caching, and A2A agents

## Known Limitations

### MariaDB/MySQL Specific Limitations

1. **No Partial JSONPath Index Support**

   - MariaDB/MySQL do not support partial indexes on JSON paths
   - Full table scans may occur for complex JSON queries
   - **Workaround**: Use additional indexed columns for frequently queried JSON fields

2. **Foreign Key Length Constraints**

   - Foreign key column names are limited to 64 characters
   - Some composite foreign keys may require shorter naming
   - **Impact**: Minimal - affects only internal schema design

3. **Case Sensitivity**

   - Table and column names are case-sensitive on Linux, case-insensitive on Windows/macOS
   - **Recommendation**: Use consistent lowercase naming for portability

4. **JSON Data Type Differences**

   - MariaDB JSON is stored as LONGTEXT with validation
   - MySQL has native JSON data type with better performance
   - **Impact**: Functional compatibility maintained, performance may vary

### General Database Limitations

1. **SQLite Connection Limits**

   - SQLite is limited to 50 connections in pool (vs 200 for other databases)
   - **Recommendation**: Use PostgreSQL or MariaDB for high-concurrency deployments

2. **MongoDB Schema Flexibility**

   - MongoDB's schemaless nature may allow invalid data structures
   - **Mitigation**: Application-level validation enforced regardless of backend

## Performance Considerations

### MariaDB/MySQL Optimization

```bash
# Recommended connection pool settings for MariaDB/MySQL
DB_POOL_SIZE=200              # Maximum persistent connections
DB_MAX_OVERFLOW=20            # Additional connections beyond pool_size
DB_POOL_TIMEOUT=30            # Seconds to wait for connection
DB_POOL_RECYCLE=3600          # Seconds before recreating connection
```

### Index Optimization

MariaDB/MySQL benefit from these additional indexes for large deployments:

```sql
-- Recommended indexes for high-performance deployments
CREATE INDEX idx_tools_team_created ON tools(team_id, created_at);
CREATE INDEX idx_resources_owner_uri ON resources(owner_email, uri);
CREATE INDEX idx_prompts_team_name ON prompts(team_id, name);
```

## Migration Between Databases

### PostgreSQL to MariaDB Migration

MariaDB is fully compatible with PostgreSQL schemas used by ContextForge. Simply update your `DATABASE_URL` to point to MariaDB:

```bash
# Change from PostgreSQL
# DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://postgres:changeme@localhost:5432/mcp

# To MariaDB
DATABASE_URL=mysql+pymysql://mysql:changeme@localhost:3306/mcp
```

The gateway will automatically handle schema creation and migrations when started with the new database URL.

### SQLite to MariaDB Migration

```bash
# 1. Export SQLite data
sqlite3 mcp.db .dump > mcp_backup.sql

# 2. Convert SQLite syntax to MySQL
sed -i 's/AUTOINCREMENT/AUTO_INCREMENT/g' mcp_backup.sql
sed -i 's/INTEGER PRIMARY KEY/INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY/g' mcp_backup.sql

# 3. Import to MariaDB
mysql -u mysql -p mcp < mcp_backup.sql
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common MariaDB/MySQL Issues

1. **Connection Refused**
   ```bash
   # Check MariaDB service status
   sudo systemctl status mariadb

   # Verify port is open
   netstat -tlnp | grep 3306
   ```

2. **Authentication Failures**
   ```bash
   # Reset user password
   sudo mariadb -e "ALTER USER 'mysql'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'newpassword';"
   sudo mariadb -e "FLUSH PRIVILEGES;"
   ```

3. **Permission Denied**
   ```bash
   # Grant all privileges
   sudo mariadb -e "GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON mcp.* TO 'mysql'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'changeme';"
   sudo mariadb -e "FLUSH PRIVILEGES;"
   ```

4. **Character Set Issues**
   ```bash
   # Set UTF-8 character set
   sudo mariadb -e "ALTER DATABASE mcp CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci;"
   ```

## Related Documentation

- [Configuration Reference](configuration.md) - Complete database configuration options
- [Docker Compose Deployment](../deployment/compose.md) - MariaDB container setup
- [Kubernetes Deployment](../deployment/kubernetes.md) - MariaDB in Kubernetes
- [Performance Tuning](tuning.md) - Database optimization guidelines
