docs/docs/manage/teams.md, before:

# Team Management

MCP Gateway organizes users into teams so you can scope access and group operational responsibilities. While first-class UI for team administration is evolving, teams are already referenced across SSO guides and configuration for mapping identities to gateway-scoped groups.

---

## Concepts

- Teams: Logical groups used to organize users for access and ownership boundaries.
- Mapping: Associate external identity attributes (e.g., Okta groups, Google Groups, GitHub orgs) to gateway team IDs.
- Usage: Team IDs are used by administrative flows and planned RBAC policies.

---

## Team Mapping Examples

Use provider-specific environment variables to auto-assign users to teams on SSO login.

### GitHub Organization → Team

```bash
# Map a GitHub organization to a gateway team
GITHUB_ORG_TEAM_MAPPING={"your-github-org": "dev-team-uuid"}
```

### Google Groups → Team

```bash
# Map Google Groups to gateway team IDs
GOOGLE_GROUPS_MAPPING={"group1@yourcompany.com": "team-uuid-1", "admins@yourcompany.com": "admin-team-uuid"}
```

### Okta Groups → Team

```bash
# Map Okta groups to gateway team IDs
OKTA_GROUP_MAPPING={"MCP Gateway Admins": "admin-team-uuid", "MCP Gateway Users": "user-team-uuid"}
```

### IBM Security Verify (Groups) → Team

```bash
# Map ISV groups to gateway team IDs
IBM_VERIFY_GROUP_MAPPING={"CN=Developers,OU=Groups": "dev-team-uuid", "CN=Administrators,OU=Groups": "admin-team-uuid"}
```

---

## Team Name Validation

Team names are validated against a strict character pattern to prevent XSS attacks and ensure consistent display across the UI.

### Allowed Characters

Team names may only contain:

- Letters (a-z, A-Z)
- Numbers (0-9)
- Spaces
- Underscores (`_`)
- Periods (`.`)
- Dashes (`-`)

**Pattern:** `^[a-zA-Z0-9_.\-\s]+$`

### Rejected Characters

The following characters are **not allowed** in team names:

- Ampersand (`&`)
- Apostrophe (`'`)
- Forward slash (`/`)
- Angle brackets (`<`, `>`)
- Quotation marks (`"`)
- Any HTML or script content

### Examples

| Team Name | Valid? | Reason |
|-----------|--------|--------|
| `Engineering Team` | ✅ | Letters and space |
| `Dev_Team-2024.v1` | ✅ | Allowed special chars |
| `R&D Team` | ❌ | Ampersand not allowed |
| `O'Connor's Team` | ❌ | Apostrophe not allowed |
| `Team <Alpha>` | ❌ | Angle brackets not allowed |

### Migrating Existing Teams

If you have existing teams with names containing restricted characters, you'll need to update them before they can be modified via the API or Admin UI.

#### Option 1: SQL Migration (Recommended)

Find affected teams:

```sql
-- SQLite
SELECT id, name FROM email_teams
WHERE name GLOB '*[^a-zA-Z0-9_. -]*';

-- PostgreSQL
SELECT id, name FROM email_teams
WHERE name !~ '^[a-zA-Z0-9_.\- ]+$';
```

Update team names manually or via script:

```sql
-- Example: Replace & with 'and'
UPDATE email_teams SET name = REPLACE(name, '&', 'and')
WHERE name LIKE '%&%';
```

#### Option 2: Python Migration Script

```python
import re
from mcpgateway.db import get_db, EmailTeam

VALID_PATTERN = re.compile(r'^[a-zA-Z0-9_.\-\s]+$')

def sanitize_name(name: str) -> str:
    """Replace invalid characters."""
    name = name.replace('&', 'and')
    return re.sub(r'[^a-zA-Z0-9_.\-\s]', '-', name)

def migrate_team_names():
    db = next(get_db())
    teams = db.query(EmailTeam).all()
    for team in teams:
        if not VALID_PATTERN.match(team.name):
            old_name = team.name
            team.name = sanitize_name(team.name)
            print(f"Migrated: '{old_name}' -> '{team.name}'")
    db.commit()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    migrate_team_names()
```

---

## Operational Tips

- Generate deterministic team UUIDs and manage them via export/import or admin APIs so they're stable across environments.
- Use a small set of core teams (e.g., developers, admins, observers) to keep mappings simple.
- Test SSO login with a pilot user per provider to verify expected team assignment.

---

## Related

- [SSO Overview](sso.md)
- [RBAC Configuration](rbac.md)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/teams.md, after:

# Team Management

ContextForge organizes users into teams so you can scope access and group operational responsibilities. While first-class UI for team administration is evolving, teams are already referenced across SSO guides and configuration for mapping identities to gateway-scoped groups.

---

## Concepts

- Teams: Logical groups used to organize users for access and ownership boundaries.
- Mapping: Associate external identity attributes (e.g., Okta groups, Google Groups, GitHub orgs) to gateway team IDs.
- Usage: Team IDs are used by administrative flows and planned RBAC policies.

---

## Team Mapping Examples

Use provider-specific environment variables to auto-assign users to teams on SSO login.

### GitHub Organization → Team

```bash
# Map a GitHub organization to a gateway team
GITHUB_ORG_TEAM_MAPPING={"your-github-org": "dev-team-uuid"}
```

### Google Groups → Team

```bash
# Map Google Groups to gateway team IDs
GOOGLE_GROUPS_MAPPING={"group1@yourcompany.com": "team-uuid-1", "admins@yourcompany.com": "admin-team-uuid"}
```

### Okta Groups → Team

```bash
# Map Okta groups to gateway team IDs
OKTA_GROUP_MAPPING={"ContextForge Admins": "admin-team-uuid", "ContextForge Users": "user-team-uuid"}
```

### IBM Security Verify (Groups) → Team

```bash
# Map ISV groups to gateway team IDs
IBM_VERIFY_GROUP_MAPPING={"CN=Developers,OU=Groups": "dev-team-uuid", "CN=Administrators,OU=Groups": "admin-team-uuid"}
```

---

## Team Name Validation

Team names are validated against a strict character pattern to prevent XSS attacks and ensure consistent display across the UI.

### Allowed Characters

Team names may only contain:

- Letters (a-z, A-Z)
- Numbers (0-9)
- Spaces
- Underscores (`_`)
- Periods (`.`)
- Dashes (`-`)

**Pattern:** `^[a-zA-Z0-9_.\-\s]+$`

### Rejected Characters

The following characters are **not allowed** in team names:

- Ampersand (`&`)
- Apostrophe (`'`)
- Forward slash (`/`)
- Angle brackets (`<`, `>`)
- Quotation marks (`"`)
- Any HTML or script content

### Examples

| Team Name | Valid? | Reason |
|-----------|--------|--------|
| `Engineering Team` | ✅ | Letters and space |
| `Dev_Team-2024.v1` | ✅ | Allowed special chars |
| `R&D Team` | ❌ | Ampersand not allowed |
| `O'Connor's Team` | ❌ | Apostrophe not allowed |
| `Team <Alpha>` | ❌ | Angle brackets not allowed |

### Migrating Existing Teams

If you have existing teams with names containing restricted characters, you'll need to update them before they can be modified via the API or Admin UI.

#### Option 1: SQL Migration (Recommended)

Find affected teams:

```sql
-- SQLite
SELECT id, name FROM email_teams
WHERE name GLOB '*[^a-zA-Z0-9_. -]*';

-- PostgreSQL
SELECT id, name FROM email_teams
WHERE name !~ '^[a-zA-Z0-9_.\- ]+$';
```

Update team names manually or via script:

```sql
-- Example: Replace & with 'and'
UPDATE email_teams SET name = REPLACE(name, '&', 'and')
WHERE name LIKE '%&%';
```

#### Option 2: Python Migration Script

```python
import re
from mcpgateway.db import get_db, EmailTeam

VALID_PATTERN = re.compile(r'^[a-zA-Z0-9_.\-\s]+$')

def sanitize_name(name: str) -> str:
    """Replace invalid characters."""
    name = name.replace('&', 'and')
    return re.sub(r'[^a-zA-Z0-9_.\-\s]', '-', name)

def migrate_team_names():
    db = next(get_db())
    teams = db.query(EmailTeam).all()
    for team in teams:
        if not VALID_PATTERN.match(team.name):
            old_name = team.name
            team.name = sanitize_name(team.name)
            print(f"Migrated: '{old_name}' -> '{team.name}'")
    db.commit()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    migrate_team_names()
```

---

## Operational Tips

- Generate deterministic team UUIDs and manage them via export/import or admin APIs so they're stable across environments.
- Use a small set of core teams (e.g., developers, admins, observers) to keep mappings simple.
- Test SSO login with a pilot user per provider to verify expected team assignment.

---

## Related

- [SSO Overview](sso.md)
- [RBAC Configuration](rbac.md)
