docs/docs/manage/well-known-uris.md, before:

# Well-Known URI Configuration

Well-known URIs are standardized endpoints that web services expose for automated discovery and security contact purposes, as defined by RFC 8615. MCP Gateway provides configurable support for standard well-known URIs with security-first defaults.

## Overview

The well-known URI handler provides:

- **robots.txt** - Search engine crawler management
- **security.txt** - Security contact information (RFC 9116)
- **Custom files** - Organization-specific policies (ai.txt, dnt-policy.txt, etc.)
- **Security-first defaults** - Appropriate for private API gateway deployment
- **Admin monitoring** - Configuration status via `/admin/well-known`

## Quick Start

### Default Configuration (Private API)

```bash
# Enable well-known URIs (enabled by default)
WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED=true

# Default robots.txt blocks all crawlers (appropriate for private APIs)
# No additional configuration needed - uses built-in secure defaults
```

Access your well-known files:

- `GET /.well-known/robots.txt` - Always available
- `GET /.well-known/security.txt` - Available when configured
- `GET /admin/well-known` - Configuration status (requires auth)

## Configuration

### Basic Settings

```bash
# Enable/disable well-known URI endpoints
WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED=true

# Cache control for well-known files (seconds)
WELL_KNOWN_CACHE_MAX_AGE=3600  # 1 hour default
```

### robots.txt Configuration

```bash
# Default: blocks all crawlers (security-first for private APIs)
WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT="User-agent: *\nDisallow: /\n\n# MCP Gateway is a private API gateway\n# Public crawling is disabled by default"

# Public API example: allow health checks, block admin
WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT="User-agent: *\nAllow: /health\nAllow: /docs\nDisallow: /admin\nDisallow: /tools\nDisallow: /"

# Allow specific bots only
WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT="User-agent: monitoring-bot\nAllow: /health\nAllow: /metrics\n\nUser-agent: *\nDisallow: /"
```

### security.txt Configuration

Configure security contact information per RFC 9116:

```bash
# Basic security contact
WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT="Contact: mailto:security@example.com\nExpires: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z\nPreferred-Languages: en"

# Comprehensive security.txt
WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT="Contact: mailto:security@example.com\nContact: https://example.com/security\nEncryption: https://example.com/pgp-key.txt\nAcknowledgments: https://example.com/security/thanks\nPreferred-Languages: en, es\nCanonical: https://api.example.com/.well-known/security.txt\nHiring: https://example.com/careers"
```

**Note**: The system automatically:

- Adds `Expires` field if missing (6 months from generation)
- Adds header comments with generation timestamp
- Validates RFC 9116 format requirements

### Custom Well-Known Files

Add organization-specific well-known files via JSON configuration:

```bash
# AI usage policy
WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES='{"ai.txt": "# AI Usage Policy\n\nThis MCP Gateway uses AI for:\n- Tool orchestration\n- Response generation\n- Error handling\n\nWe do not use AI for:\n- User data analysis\n- Behavioral tracking\n- Decision making without human oversight"}'

# Multiple custom files
WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES='{"ai.txt": "AI Policy: Responsible use only", "dnt-policy.txt": "# Do Not Track Policy\n\nWe respect the DNT header.\nNo tracking cookies are used.\nOnly essential session data is stored.", "change-password": "https://mycompany.com/account/password"}'
```

## API Access

### Public Endpoints (No Authentication)

Well-known URIs are public by design (RFC 8615):

```bash
# Always available (when enabled)
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/robots.txt

# Available when configured
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/security.txt

# Custom files (when configured)
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/ai.txt
```

### Admin Monitoring (Authentication Required)

```bash
# Check configuration status
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  https://api.example.com/admin/well-known

# Response example:
{
  "enabled": true,
  "configured_files": [
    {
      "path": "/.well-known/robots.txt",
      "enabled": true,
      "description": "Robot exclusion standard",
      "cache_max_age": 3600
    },
    {
      "path": "/.well-known/security.txt",
      "enabled": true,
      "description": "Security contact information",
      "cache_max_age": 3600
    }
  ],
  "supported_files": ["robots.txt", "security.txt", "ai.txt", "dnt-policy.txt", "change-password"],
  "cache_max_age": 3600
}
```

## Security Considerations

### Private API Deployment (Default)

For private API gateways, the default configuration:

- **Blocks all crawlers** via robots.txt
- **Minimizes information disclosure**
- **No security.txt** (unless explicitly configured)
- **Cache headers** for performance but not long-term public caching

### Public API Deployment

For public-facing APIs, consider:

- **Selective crawler access** - allow health checks, block admin endpoints
- **Security contact information** - enable security.txt for responsible disclosure
- **Custom policies** - AI usage policy, privacy policy links
- **Monitoring** - track well-known endpoint access in logs

### Information Disclosure

Well-known URIs intentionally disclose information:

- **Service type/purpose** through robots.txt comments
- **Security contact** through security.txt
- **Organizational policies** through custom files

Review all content before deployment.

## Deployment Examples

### Docker Compose

```yaml
services:
  gateway:
    environment:
      WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED: "true"
      WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT: |
        User-agent: monitoring-bot
        Allow: /health

        User-agent: *
        Disallow: /
      WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT: |
        Contact: security@example.com
        Encryption: https://example.com/pgp
        Expires: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z
      WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES: '{"ai.txt": "AI is used for tool orchestration"}'
      WELL_KNOWN_CACHE_MAX_AGE: "7200"
```

### Kubernetes ConfigMap

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-wellknown
data:
  WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED: "true"
  WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT: |
    User-agent: *
    Disallow: /

    # Private API - No public crawling
  WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT: |
    Contact: mailto:security@example.com
    Contact: https://example.com/security
    Expires: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z
    Preferred-Languages: en
  WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES: |
    {
      "ai.txt": "This service uses AI for tool orchestration only.",
      "dnt-policy.txt": "We honor Do Not Track headers."
    }
```

### Helm Chart Values

```yaml
config:
  wellKnown:
    enabled: true
    cacheMaxAge: 3600
    robotsTxt: |
      User-agent: internal-monitor
      Allow: /health
      Allow: /metrics

      User-agent: *
      Disallow: /
    securityTxt: |
      Contact: security@example.com
      Encryption: https://example.com/pgp-key.txt
      Acknowledgments: https://example.com/security/hall-of-fame
    customFiles:
      ai.txt: "AI Usage: Tool orchestration and response generation only"
      dnt-policy.txt: "We respect Do Not Track headers and implement minimal tracking"
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Problem**: Well-known endpoints return 404
```bash
# Check if feature is enabled
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  https://api.example.com/admin/well-known
```

**Problem**: security.txt not available
```bash
# security.txt is only enabled when content is provided
WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT="Contact: security@example.com"
```

**Problem**: Custom files not working
```bash
# Ensure valid JSON format
WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES='{"ai.txt": "AI Policy content here"}'

# Check JSON validity
echo '{"ai.txt": "content"}' | python3 -m json.tool
```

**Problem**: Cache headers not updating
```bash
# Clear browser cache or check cache-control header
curl -I https://api.example.com/.well-known/robots.txt
```

### Validation

Check well-known URI configuration:

```bash
# Test robots.txt
curl -I https://api.example.com/.well-known/robots.txt

# Test security.txt (if configured)
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/security.txt

# Check admin status
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  https://api.example.com/admin/well-known | jq .
```

### Monitoring

Monitor well-known URI access in logs:

```bash
# Search for well-known requests in logs
grep "/.well-known/" /var/log/mcpgateway.log

# Monitor for unexpected access patterns
grep -E "(/.well-known/|robots|security\.txt)" /var/log/access.log | \
  awk '{print $1, $7}' | sort | uniq -c
```

## Standards Compliance

### RFC 8615 - Well-Known URIs
- ✅ Serves content at `/.well-known/` path
- ✅ Uses appropriate content types
- ✅ Implements proper caching headers
- ✅ Provides helpful error messages

### RFC 9116 - security.txt
- ✅ Validates required fields
- ✅ Auto-generates Expires field if missing
- ✅ Serves with correct content-type
- ✅ Supports all standard fields (Contact, Expires, Encryption, etc.)

### RFC 9309 - Robots Exclusion Protocol
- ✅ Standard robots.txt format
- ✅ User-agent directive support
- ✅ Allow/Disallow directive support
- ✅ Comment support for documentation

## Related Documentation

- [Security Guide](securing.md) - General security configuration
- [ADR-015](../architecture/adr/015-well-known-uri-handler.md) - Architecture decision record
- [Export/Import](export-import.md) - Configuration management
- [Environment Variables](../overview/index.md) - Complete configuration reference

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/well-known-uris.md, after:

# Well-Known URI Configuration

Well-known URIs are standardized endpoints that web services expose for automated discovery and security contact purposes, as defined by RFC 8615. ContextForge provides configurable support for standard well-known URIs with security-first defaults.

## Overview

The well-known URI handler provides:

- **robots.txt** - Search engine crawler management
- **security.txt** - Security contact information (RFC 9116)
- **Custom files** - Organization-specific policies (ai.txt, dnt-policy.txt, etc.)
- **Security-first defaults** - Appropriate for private API gateway deployment
- **Admin monitoring** - Configuration status via `/admin/well-known`

## Quick Start

### Default Configuration (Private API)

```bash
# Enable well-known URIs (enabled by default)
WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED=true

# Default robots.txt blocks all crawlers (appropriate for private APIs)
# No additional configuration needed - uses built-in secure defaults
```

Access your well-known files:

- `GET /.well-known/robots.txt` - Always available
- `GET /.well-known/security.txt` - Available when configured
- `GET /admin/well-known` - Configuration status (requires auth)

## Configuration

### Basic Settings

```bash
# Enable/disable well-known URI endpoints
WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED=true

# Cache control for well-known files (seconds)
WELL_KNOWN_CACHE_MAX_AGE=3600  # 1 hour default
```

### robots.txt Configuration

```bash
# Default: blocks all crawlers (security-first for private APIs)
WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT="User-agent: *\nDisallow: /\n\n# ContextForge is a private API gateway\n# Public crawling is disabled by default"

# Public API example: allow health checks, block admin
WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT="User-agent: *\nAllow: /health\nAllow: /docs\nDisallow: /admin\nDisallow: /tools\nDisallow: /"

# Allow specific bots only
WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT="User-agent: monitoring-bot\nAllow: /health\nAllow: /metrics\n\nUser-agent: *\nDisallow: /"
```

### security.txt Configuration

Configure security contact information per RFC 9116:

```bash
# Basic security contact
WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT="Contact: mailto:security@example.com\nExpires: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z\nPreferred-Languages: en"

# Comprehensive security.txt
WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT="Contact: mailto:security@example.com\nContact: https://example.com/security\nEncryption: https://example.com/pgp-key.txt\nAcknowledgments: https://example.com/security/thanks\nPreferred-Languages: en, es\nCanonical: https://api.example.com/.well-known/security.txt\nHiring: https://example.com/careers"
```

**Note**: The system automatically:

- Adds `Expires` field if missing (6 months from generation)
- Adds header comments with generation timestamp
- Validates RFC 9116 format requirements

### Custom Well-Known Files

Add organization-specific well-known files via JSON configuration:

```bash
# AI usage policy
WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES='{"ai.txt": "# AI Usage Policy\n\nThis ContextForge uses AI for:\n- Tool orchestration\n- Response generation\n- Error handling\n\nWe do not use AI for:\n- User data analysis\n- Behavioral tracking\n- Decision making without human oversight"}'

# Multiple custom files
WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES='{"ai.txt": "AI Policy: Responsible use only", "dnt-policy.txt": "# Do Not Track Policy\n\nWe respect the DNT header.\nNo tracking cookies are used.\nOnly essential session data is stored.", "change-password": "https://mycompany.com/account/password"}'
```

## API Access

### Public Endpoints (No Authentication)

Well-known URIs are public by design (RFC 8615):

```bash
# Always available (when enabled)
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/robots.txt

# Available when configured
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/security.txt

# Custom files (when configured)
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/ai.txt
```

### Admin Monitoring (Authentication Required)

```bash
# Check configuration status
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  https://api.example.com/admin/well-known

# Response example:
{
  "enabled": true,
  "configured_files": [
    {
      "path": "/.well-known/robots.txt",
      "enabled": true,
      "description": "Robot exclusion standard",
      "cache_max_age": 3600
    },
    {
      "path": "/.well-known/security.txt",
      "enabled": true,
      "description": "Security contact information",
      "cache_max_age": 3600
    }
  ],
  "supported_files": ["robots.txt", "security.txt", "ai.txt", "dnt-policy.txt", "change-password"],
  "cache_max_age": 3600
}
```

## Security Considerations

### Private API Deployment (Default)

For private API gateways, the default configuration:

- **Blocks all crawlers** via robots.txt
- **Minimizes information disclosure**
- **No security.txt** (unless explicitly configured)
- **Cache headers** for performance but not long-term public caching

### Public API Deployment

For public-facing APIs, consider:

- **Selective crawler access** - allow health checks, block admin endpoints
- **Security contact information** - enable security.txt for responsible disclosure
- **Custom policies** - AI usage policy, privacy policy links
- **Monitoring** - track well-known endpoint access in logs

### Information Disclosure

Well-known URIs intentionally disclose information:

- **Service type/purpose** through robots.txt comments
- **Security contact** through security.txt
- **Organizational policies** through custom files

Review all content before deployment.

## Deployment Examples

### Docker Compose

```yaml
services:
  gateway:
    environment:
      WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED: "true"
      WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT: |
        User-agent: monitoring-bot
        Allow: /health

        User-agent: *
        Disallow: /
      WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT: |
        Contact: security@example.com
        Encryption: https://example.com/pgp
        Expires: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z
      WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES: '{"ai.txt": "AI is used for tool orchestration"}'
      WELL_KNOWN_CACHE_MAX_AGE: "7200"
```

### Kubernetes ConfigMap

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-wellknown
data:
  WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED: "true"
  WELL_KNOWN_ROBOTS_TXT: |
    User-agent: *
    Disallow: /

    # Private API - No public crawling
  WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT: |
    Contact: mailto:security@example.com
    Contact: https://example.com/security
    Expires: 2025-12-31T23:59:59Z
    Preferred-Languages: en
  WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES: |
    {
      "ai.txt": "This service uses AI for tool orchestration only.",
      "dnt-policy.txt": "We honor Do Not Track headers."
    }
```

### Helm Chart Values

```yaml
config:
  wellKnown:
    enabled: true
    cacheMaxAge: 3600
    robotsTxt: |
      User-agent: internal-monitor
      Allow: /health
      Allow: /metrics

      User-agent: *
      Disallow: /
    securityTxt: |
      Contact: security@example.com
      Encryption: https://example.com/pgp-key.txt
      Acknowledgments: https://example.com/security/hall-of-fame
    customFiles:
      ai.txt: "AI Usage: Tool orchestration and response generation only"
      dnt-policy.txt: "We respect Do Not Track headers and implement minimal tracking"
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Problem**: Well-known endpoints return 404
```bash
# Check if feature is enabled
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  https://api.example.com/admin/well-known
```

**Problem**: security.txt not available
```bash
# security.txt is only enabled when content is provided
WELL_KNOWN_SECURITY_TXT="Contact: security@example.com"
```

**Problem**: Custom files not working
```bash
# Ensure valid JSON format
WELL_KNOWN_CUSTOM_FILES='{"ai.txt": "AI Policy content here"}'

# Check JSON validity
echo '{"ai.txt": "content"}' | python3 -m json.tool
```

**Problem**: Cache headers not updating
```bash
# Clear browser cache or check cache-control header
curl -I https://api.example.com/.well-known/robots.txt
```

### Validation

Check well-known URI configuration:

```bash
# Test robots.txt
curl -I https://api.example.com/.well-known/robots.txt

# Test security.txt (if configured)
curl https://api.example.com/.well-known/security.txt

# Check admin status
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  https://api.example.com/admin/well-known | jq .
```

### Monitoring

Monitor well-known URI access in logs:

```bash
# Search for well-known requests in logs
grep "/.well-known/" /var/log/mcpgateway.log

# Monitor for unexpected access patterns
grep -E "(/.well-known/|robots|security\.txt)" /var/log/access.log | \
  awk '{print $1, $7}' | sort | uniq -c
```

## Standards Compliance

### RFC 8615 - Well-Known URIs
- ✅ Serves content at `/.well-known/` path
- ✅ Uses appropriate content types
- ✅ Implements proper caching headers
- ✅ Provides helpful error messages

### RFC 9116 - security.txt
- ✅ Validates required fields
- ✅ Auto-generates Expires field if missing
- ✅ Serves with correct content-type
- ✅ Supports all standard fields (Contact, Expires, Encryption, etc.)

### RFC 9309 - Robots Exclusion Protocol
- ✅ Standard robots.txt format
- ✅ User-agent directive support
- ✅ Allow/Disallow directive support
- ✅ Comment support for documentation

## Related Documentation

- [Security Guide](securing.md) - General security configuration
- [ADR-015](../architecture/adr/015-well-known-uri-handler.md) - Architecture decision record
- [Export/Import](export-import.md) - Configuration management
- [Environment Variables](../overview/index.md) - Complete configuration reference
