docs/docs/architecture/rfc9728-compliance.md, before:

# RFC 9728 OAuth Protected Resource Metadata Compliance

## Overview

MCP Gateway implements [RFC 9728: OAuth 2.0 Protected Resource Metadata](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728) to enable OAuth-protected MCP servers to advertise their authorization server configuration. This allows MCP clients (like Claude Desktop, MCP Inspector) to discover OAuth endpoints and initiate browser-based SSO flows.

## RFC 9728 Requirements

Per RFC 9728 Section 3.1, the well-known URI for OAuth Protected Resource Metadata is constructed by:

1. Taking the protected resource URL: `https://gateway.example.com/servers/{server_id}/mcp`
2. Removing any trailing slash
3. Inserting `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/` after the scheme and authority
4. Result: `https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

### Response Format

The metadata response fields (per RFC 9728 Section 2):

- `resource` (string, required): The protected resource identifier URL
- `authorization_servers` (array, optional per RFC 9728, required per MCP spec): JSON array of authorization server issuer URIs
- `bearer_methods_supported` (array, optional): Supported bearer token methods (e.g., `["header"]`)
- `scopes_supported` (array, optional): List of supported OAuth scopes

**Example Response (per RFC 9728 Section 3.2):**

```json
{
  "resource": "https://gateway.example.com/servers/abc-123/mcp",
  "authorization_servers": ["https://auth.example.com"],
  "bearer_methods_supported": ["header"],
  "scopes_supported": ["read", "write"]
}
```

## Implementation

### Compliant Endpoint

**Path:** `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

**Method:** GET

**Authentication:** None required (per RFC 9728)

**Implementation:** [`mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py:118`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py#L118)

**Features:**

- Path-based discovery (not query parameters)
- UUID validation for `server_id` (prevents path traversal)
- Returns `authorization_servers` field as JSON array (RFC 9728 Section 2)
- Includes `/mcp` suffix in resource URL
- Cache headers for performance
- Only exposes public servers with OAuth enabled

**Example Request:**

```bash
curl https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp
```

**Example Response:**

```json
{
  "resource": "https://gateway.example.com/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp",
  "authorization_servers": ["https://auth.example.com"],
  "bearer_methods_supported": ["header"],
  "scopes_supported": ["openid", "profile", "email"]
}
```

### Service Layer

**Implementation:** [`mcpgateway/services/server_service.py:1913`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/mcpgateway/services/server_service.py#L1913)

The `get_oauth_protected_resource_metadata()` method:

- Returns RFC 9728 compliant metadata with `authorization_servers` field (JSON array)
- Reads `authorization_servers` (plural) from config as primary source
- Falls back to `authorization_server` (singular) from config for backward compatibility
- Only exposes metadata for public, enabled servers with OAuth configured
- Includes optional `scopes_supported` if configured

**Configuration Priority:**

1. `oauth_config.authorization_servers` (array, RFC 9728 compliant)
2. `oauth_config.authorization_server` (string, legacy fallback — wrapped in array)

### Security

**UUID Validation:**

The endpoint validates that `server_id` is a valid UUID using regex pattern matching. This prevents:

- Path traversal attacks (`../admin`)
- SQL injection attempts
- Arbitrary path access

**Access Control:**

- Only public servers expose OAuth metadata
- Disabled servers return 404
- Private/team servers return 404 (prevents information leakage)
- OAuth must be explicitly enabled on the server

**Implementation:** [`mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py:39`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py#L39)

```python
UUID_PATTERN = re.compile(r"^[0-9a-f]{8}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{12}$", re.IGNORECASE)
```

## Deprecated Endpoints

### Query Parameter Endpoint (Deprecated)

**Path:** `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource?server_id={id}`

**Status:** Returns 404 with deprecation message

**Reason:** Non-compliant with RFC 9728 (uses query parameters instead of path-based discovery)

**Migration:** Use `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

### Server-Scoped Endpoint (Deprecated)

**Path:** `/servers/{server_id}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource`

**Status:** Returns 301 redirect to compliant endpoint

**Reason:** Non-compliant with RFC 9728 (appends well-known path instead of inserting it)

**Migration:** Automatically redirects to `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

## Configuration

### Server OAuth Configuration

To enable OAuth Protected Resource Metadata for a server, configure the server's `oauth_config`:

```json
{
  "oauth_enabled": true,
  "oauth_config": {
    "authorization_servers": ["https://auth.example.com"],
    "scopes_supported": ["openid", "profile", "email"],
    "client_id": "your-client-id",
    "client_secret": "your-client-secret"
  }
}
```

**Required Fields:**

- `authorization_servers` (array): JSON array of authorization server issuer URIs (at least one required per MCP spec)

**Optional Fields:**

- `scopes_supported` (array): List of supported OAuth scopes
- `client_id` (string): OAuth client ID (not exposed in metadata)
- `client_secret` (string): OAuth client secret (never exposed)

**Legacy Configuration:**

For backward compatibility, the system also accepts a singular string form:

```json
{
  "authorization_server": "https://auth.example.com"
}
```

This is automatically wrapped in an array in the response.

### Global Settings

**Environment Variables:**

- `WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED=true` - Enable well-known endpoints (default: true)
- `WELL_KNOWN_CACHE_MAX_AGE=3600` - Cache duration in seconds (default: 3600)

## Testing

### Unit Tests

Comprehensive test suite: [`tests/unit/mcpgateway/routers/test_well_known_rfc9728.py`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/tests/unit/mcpgateway/routers/test_well_known_rfc9728.py)

**Test Coverage:**

- RFC 9728 compliant endpoint success cases
- Path validation and security (UUID validation, path traversal prevention)
- Deprecated endpoint behavior (404 and 301 responses)
- Service layer RFC 9728 compliance
- Backward compatibility with legacy configurations
- Security validation (SQL injection, path traversal, access control)

**Run Tests:**

```bash
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/routers/test_well_known_rfc9728.py -v
```

### Manual Testing

**Test with curl:**

```bash
# RFC 9728 compliant endpoint
curl -i https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp

# Verify response includes authorization_servers array
curl -s https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp | jq .

# Test deprecated query-param endpoint (should return 404)
curl -i https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource?server_id=550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000

# Test deprecated server-scoped endpoint (should return 301)
curl -i https://gateway.example.com/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
```

**Test with MCP Inspector:**

1. Configure an OAuth-enabled server in MCP Gateway
2. Open MCP Inspector
3. Connect to the server using the MCP endpoint: `https://gateway.example.com/servers/{server_id}/mcp`
4. MCP Inspector should automatically discover OAuth metadata via RFC 9728
5. Verify browser-based OAuth flow initiates correctly

## Migration Guide

### For MCP Gateway Administrators

**No action required.** The implementation maintains backward compatibility:

- Existing servers with `authorization_server` (singular string) continue to work
- The value is automatically wrapped in an array for the RFC 9728 response
- Deprecated endpoints provide clear migration guidance

**Recommended Actions:**

1. Update server configurations to use `authorization_servers` (plural array) field
2. Test OAuth flows with MCP clients
3. Monitor logs for deprecated endpoint usage

### For MCP Client Developers

**Update OAuth discovery logic:**

**Before (Non-compliant):**

```python
# Query parameter approach (deprecated)
metadata_url = f"{base_url}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource?server_id={server_id}"
```

**After (RFC 9728 Compliant):**

```python
# Path-based approach (RFC 9728)
resource_url = f"{base_url}/servers/{server_id}/mcp"
# Insert /.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/ after scheme and authority
parsed = urlparse(resource_url)
metadata_url = f"{parsed.scheme}://{parsed.netloc}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource{parsed.path}"
```

**Handle authorization_servers field:**

```python
# Parse metadata response
metadata = requests.get(metadata_url).json()

# RFC 9728 Section 2: authorization_servers is a JSON array
auth_servers = metadata["authorization_servers"]  # e.g., ["https://auth.example.com"]
```

## Compliance Checklist

- [x] Path-based discovery (not query parameters)
- [x] `authorization_servers` field as JSON array (RFC 9728 Section 2)
- [x] Resource URL includes `/mcp` suffix
- [x] No authentication required for metadata endpoint
- [x] Cache headers for performance
- [x] UUID validation for security
- [x] Only public servers exposed
- [x] Backward compatibility with legacy configs
- [x] Comprehensive test coverage
- [x] Deprecated endpoints provide migration guidance

## References

- [RFC 9728: OAuth 2.0 Protected Resource Metadata](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728)
- [MCP Specification: Authorization (2025-06-18)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization)
- [IANA OAuth Protected Resource Metadata Registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml)

## Related Documentation

- [OAuth Design](oauth-design.md) - Overall OAuth architecture
- [Multi-tenancy](multitenancy.md) - Team-based access control
- [RBAC](../manage/rbac.md) - Role-based permissions

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/architecture/rfc9728-compliance.md, after:

# RFC 9728 OAuth Protected Resource Metadata Compliance

## Overview

ContextForge implements [RFC 9728: OAuth 2.0 Protected Resource Metadata](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728) to enable OAuth-protected MCP servers to advertise their authorization server configuration. This allows MCP clients (like Claude Desktop, MCP Inspector) to discover OAuth endpoints and initiate browser-based SSO flows.

## RFC 9728 Requirements

Per RFC 9728 Section 3.1, the well-known URI for OAuth Protected Resource Metadata is constructed by:

1. Taking the protected resource URL: `https://gateway.example.com/servers/{server_id}/mcp`
2. Removing any trailing slash
3. Inserting `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/` after the scheme and authority
4. Result: `https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

### Response Format

The metadata response fields (per RFC 9728 Section 2):

- `resource` (string, required): The protected resource identifier URL
- `authorization_servers` (array, optional per RFC 9728, required per MCP spec): JSON array of authorization server issuer URIs
- `bearer_methods_supported` (array, optional): Supported bearer token methods (e.g., `["header"]`)
- `scopes_supported` (array, optional): List of supported OAuth scopes

**Example Response (per RFC 9728 Section 3.2):**

```json
{
  "resource": "https://gateway.example.com/servers/abc-123/mcp",
  "authorization_servers": ["https://auth.example.com"],
  "bearer_methods_supported": ["header"],
  "scopes_supported": ["read", "write"]
}
```

## Implementation

### Compliant Endpoint

**Path:** `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

**Method:** GET

**Authentication:** None required (per RFC 9728)

**Implementation:** [`mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py:118`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py#L118)

**Features:**

- Path-based discovery (not query parameters)
- UUID validation for `server_id` (prevents path traversal)
- Returns `authorization_servers` field as JSON array (RFC 9728 Section 2)
- Includes `/mcp` suffix in resource URL
- Cache headers for performance
- Only exposes public servers with OAuth enabled

**Example Request:**

```bash
curl https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp
```

**Example Response:**

```json
{
  "resource": "https://gateway.example.com/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp",
  "authorization_servers": ["https://auth.example.com"],
  "bearer_methods_supported": ["header"],
  "scopes_supported": ["openid", "profile", "email"]
}
```

### Service Layer

**Implementation:** [`mcpgateway/services/server_service.py:1913`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/mcpgateway/services/server_service.py#L1913)

The `get_oauth_protected_resource_metadata()` method:

- Returns RFC 9728 compliant metadata with `authorization_servers` field (JSON array)
- Reads `authorization_servers` (plural) from config as primary source
- Falls back to `authorization_server` (singular) from config for backward compatibility
- Only exposes metadata for public, enabled servers with OAuth configured
- Includes optional `scopes_supported` if configured

**Configuration Priority:**

1. `oauth_config.authorization_servers` (array, RFC 9728 compliant)
2. `oauth_config.authorization_server` (string, legacy fallback — wrapped in array)

### Security

**UUID Validation:**

The endpoint validates that `server_id` is a valid UUID using regex pattern matching. This prevents:

- Path traversal attacks (`../admin`)
- SQL injection attempts
- Arbitrary path access

**Access Control:**

- Only public servers expose OAuth metadata
- Disabled servers return 404
- Private/team servers return 404 (prevents information leakage)
- OAuth must be explicitly enabled on the server

**Implementation:** [`mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py:39`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/mcpgateway/routers/well_known.py#L39)

```python
UUID_PATTERN = re.compile(r"^[0-9a-f]{8}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{12}$", re.IGNORECASE)
```

## Deprecated Endpoints

### Query Parameter Endpoint (Deprecated)

**Path:** `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource?server_id={id}`

**Status:** Returns 404 with deprecation message

**Reason:** Non-compliant with RFC 9728 (uses query parameters instead of path-based discovery)

**Migration:** Use `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

### Server-Scoped Endpoint (Deprecated)

**Path:** `/servers/{server_id}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource`

**Status:** Returns 301 redirect to compliant endpoint

**Reason:** Non-compliant with RFC 9728 (appends well-known path instead of inserting it)

**Migration:** Automatically redirects to `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/{server_id}/mcp`

## Configuration

### Server OAuth Configuration

To enable OAuth Protected Resource Metadata for a server, configure the server's `oauth_config`:

```json
{
  "oauth_enabled": true,
  "oauth_config": {
    "authorization_servers": ["https://auth.example.com"],
    "scopes_supported": ["openid", "profile", "email"],
    "client_id": "your-client-id",
    "client_secret": "your-client-secret"
  }
}
```

**Required Fields:**

- `authorization_servers` (array): JSON array of authorization server issuer URIs (at least one required per MCP spec)

**Optional Fields:**

- `scopes_supported` (array): List of supported OAuth scopes
- `client_id` (string): OAuth client ID (not exposed in metadata)
- `client_secret` (string): OAuth client secret (never exposed)

**Legacy Configuration:**

For backward compatibility, the system also accepts a singular string form:

```json
{
  "authorization_server": "https://auth.example.com"
}
```

This is automatically wrapped in an array in the response.

### Global Settings

**Environment Variables:**

- `WELL_KNOWN_ENABLED=true` - Enable well-known endpoints (default: true)
- `WELL_KNOWN_CACHE_MAX_AGE=3600` - Cache duration in seconds (default: 3600)

## Testing

### Unit Tests

Comprehensive test suite: [`tests/unit/mcpgateway/routers/test_well_known_rfc9728.py`](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/0c13cc9bcd78d4e70a4a62d00bb6785f7630eed6/tests/unit/mcpgateway/routers/test_well_known_rfc9728.py)

**Test Coverage:**

- RFC 9728 compliant endpoint success cases
- Path validation and security (UUID validation, path traversal prevention)
- Deprecated endpoint behavior (404 and 301 responses)
- Service layer RFC 9728 compliance
- Backward compatibility with legacy configurations
- Security validation (SQL injection, path traversal, access control)

**Run Tests:**

```bash
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/routers/test_well_known_rfc9728.py -v
```

### Manual Testing

**Test with curl:**

```bash
# RFC 9728 compliant endpoint
curl -i https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp

# Verify response includes authorization_servers array
curl -s https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/mcp | jq .

# Test deprecated query-param endpoint (should return 404)
curl -i https://gateway.example.com/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource?server_id=550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000

# Test deprecated server-scoped endpoint (should return 301)
curl -i https://gateway.example.com/servers/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
```

**Test with MCP Inspector:**

1. Configure an OAuth-enabled server in ContextForge
2. Open MCP Inspector
3. Connect to the server using the MCP endpoint: `https://gateway.example.com/servers/{server_id}/mcp`
4. MCP Inspector should automatically discover OAuth metadata via RFC 9728
5. Verify browser-based OAuth flow initiates correctly

## Migration Guide

### For ContextForge Administrators

**No action required.** The implementation maintains backward compatibility:

- Existing servers with `authorization_server` (singular string) continue to work
- The value is automatically wrapped in an array for the RFC 9728 response
- Deprecated endpoints provide clear migration guidance

**Recommended Actions:**

1. Update server configurations to use `authorization_servers` (plural array) field
2. Test OAuth flows with MCP clients
3. Monitor logs for deprecated endpoint usage

### For MCP Client Developers

**Update OAuth discovery logic:**

**Before (Non-compliant):**

```python
# Query parameter approach (deprecated)
metadata_url = f"{base_url}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource?server_id={server_id}"
```

**After (RFC 9728 Compliant):**

```python
# Path-based approach (RFC 9728)
resource_url = f"{base_url}/servers/{server_id}/mcp"
# Insert /.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/ after scheme and authority
parsed = urlparse(resource_url)
metadata_url = f"{parsed.scheme}://{parsed.netloc}/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource{parsed.path}"
```

**Handle authorization_servers field:**

```python
# Parse metadata response
metadata = requests.get(metadata_url).json()

# RFC 9728 Section 2: authorization_servers is a JSON array
auth_servers = metadata["authorization_servers"]  # e.g., ["https://auth.example.com"]
```

## Compliance Checklist

- [x] Path-based discovery (not query parameters)
- [x] `authorization_servers` field as JSON array (RFC 9728 Section 2)
- [x] Resource URL includes `/mcp` suffix
- [x] No authentication required for metadata endpoint
- [x] Cache headers for performance
- [x] UUID validation for security
- [x] Only public servers exposed
- [x] Backward compatibility with legacy configs
- [x] Comprehensive test coverage
- [x] Deprecated endpoints provide migration guidance

## References

- [RFC 9728: OAuth 2.0 Protected Resource Metadata](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728)
- [MCP Specification: Authorization (2025-06-18)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/authorization)
- [IANA OAuth Protected Resource Metadata Registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml)

## Related Documentation

- [OAuth Design](oauth-design.md) - Overall OAuth architecture
- [Multi-tenancy](multitenancy.md) - Team-based access control
- [RBAC](../manage/rbac.md) - Role-based permissions
