docs/docs/using/servers/hashicorp/terraform.md, before:

# Terraform MCP Server

## Overview

The Terraform MCP Server is a [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/getting-started/intro) server that enables seamless integration between Terraform and MCP-compatible tools. It provides a consistent, typed interface for querying and interacting with the [Terraform Registry](https://registry.terraform.io/), making it easier to search providers, explore resources and data sources, and retrieve module details.

### Features

➡️ **Supports two transport mechanisms:**

* **Stdio**: Standard input/output streams for direct process communication between local processes on the same machine, providing optimal performance with no network overhead.
* **Streamable HTTP**: Uses HTTP POST for client-to-server messages with optional Server-Sent Events (SSE) for streaming capabilities. This is the recommended transport for remote/distributed setups.

➡️ **Terraform Provider Discovery**: Query and explore Terraform providers and their documentation

➡️ **Module Search & Analysis**: Search and retrieve detailed information about Terraform modules

➡️ **Registry Integration**: Direct integration with Terraform Registry APIs

➡️ **Container Ready**: Docker support for easy deployment

This makes the Terraform MCP Server a powerful tool for enabling advanced automation and interaction workflows in Infrastructure as Code (IaC) development.

## Prerequisites

* **Go** – Required if you plan to install the server from source. Install [Go](https://go.dev/doc/install).
* **Docker** – Required if you plan to run the server in a container. Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/).
* **jq** – Optional but recommended for formatting JSON output in command results. Install [jq](https://jqlang.org/download/).

## Installation And Setup

### Option 1: Install from source (Go)

#### Install the latest release version
```shell
go install github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server/cmd/terraform-mcp-server@latest
```
#### Install the main branch from source
```shell
go install github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server/cmd/terraform-mcp-server@main
```

### Option 2: Build The Image (Docker)

```shell
# Clone the source repository
git clone https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server.git && cd terraform-mcp-server
# Build the docker image
make docker-build
```

### Sessions Mode In Streamable HTTP Transport

The Terraform MCP Server supports two session modes when using the Streamable HTTP transport:

**Stateful Mode (Default)**: Maintains session state between requests, enabling context-aware operations.

**Stateless Mode**: Each request is processed independently without maintaining session state, which can be useful for high-availability deployments or when using load balancers.
To enable stateless mode, set the environment variable: `export MCP_SESSION_MODE=stateless`

### Environment Variables Configuration

| Variable               | Description                                              | Default     |
|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| `TRANSPORT_MODE`       | Set to `streamable-http` to enable HTTP transport (legacy `http` value still supported) | `stdio`     |
| `TRANSPORT_HOST`       | Host to bind the HTTP server                             | `127.0.0.1` |
| `TRANSPORT_PORT`       | HTTP server port                                         | `8080`      |
| `MCP_ENDPOINT`         | HTTP server endpoint path                                | `/mcp`      |
| `MCP_SESSION_MODE`     | Session mode: `stateful` or `stateless`                  | `stateful`  |
| `MCP_ALLOWED_ORIGINS`  | Comma-separated list of allowed origins for CORS         | `""` (empty)|
| `MCP_CORS_MODE`        | CORS mode: `strict`, `development`, or `disabled`        | `strict`    |
| `MCP_RATE_LIMIT_GLOBAL`| Global rate limit (format: `rps:burst`)                  | `10:20`     |
| `MCP_RATE_LIMIT_SESSION`| Per-session rate limit (format: `rps:burst`)            | `5:10`      |

### Starting the Server

#### [Go] Running the server in Stdio mode

```shell
terraform-mcp-server stdio [--log-file /path/to/log]
```

#### [Go] Running the server in Streamable HTTP mode

```shell
terraform-mcp-server streamable-http [--transport-port 8080] [--transport-host 127.0.0.1] [--mcp-endpoint /mcp] [--log-file /path/to/log]
```

#### [Docker] Running the server in Stdio mode

```shell
docker run -i --rm terraform-mcp-server:dev
```

#### [Docker] Running the server in Streamable HTTP mode

```shell
docker run -p 8080:8080 --rm -e TRANSPORT_MODE=streamable-http -e TRANSPORT_HOST=0.0.0.0 terraform-mcp-server:dev
```

### Server endpoint

Given your configuration, the endpoint could be the following:

* Server: `http://{hostname}:8080/mcp`

## MCP Gateway Integration

> Set the following environment variables on your system, as they will be used in subsequent commands for the MCP Gateway integration.

```shell
export MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL=""       # e.g: http://mcp.gateway.com:4444
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=""   # e.g: gateway-bearer-token
```

### Registration With MCP Gateway

```shell
# Registering the Terraform Server in Streamable HTTP mode
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/gateways" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "name": "terraform_server",
    "url": "http://127.0.0.1:8080/mcp",
    "description": "Terraform MCP Server",
    "transport": "STREAMABLEHTTP"
}' | jq
```

### Obtain IDs for available tools

```shell
# Lists Terraform tools from the registered server, fetches their IDs, and exports them as environment variables (TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_1 … TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_8)
i=1; for id in $(curl --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/tools" --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq -r '.[].id'); do export TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_$i="$id"; echo "TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_$i=$id"; i=$((i+1)); done
```

### Create Virtual Server And Expose The Terraform Tools

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/servers" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "name": "terraform_server",
    "description": "Terraform MCP Server with module search and registry integration",
    "associatedTools": [
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_1'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_2'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_3'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_4'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_5'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_6'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_7'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_8'"
    ]
}' | jq
```

### Retrieve Exposed Terraform Tools

```shell
export TERRAFORM_SERVER_ID="" # Virtual Server ID returned by the previous command
curl --request GET \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/servers/${TERRAFORM_SERVER_ID}/tools" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq
```

### Available Tools

#### Providers

##### `search_providers`

```json
"properties": {
    "provider_data_type": {
        "default": "resources",
        "description": "The type of the document to retrieve, for general information use 'guides', for deploying resources use 'resources', for reading pre-deployed resources use 'data-sources', for functions use 'functions', and for overview of the provider use 'overview'",
        "enum": [
            "resources",
            "data-sources",
            "functions",
            "guides",
            "overview"
        ],
        "type": "string"
    },
    "provider_name": {
        "description": "The name of the Terraform provider to perform the read or deployment operation",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "provider_namespace": {
        "description": "The publisher of the Terraform provider, typically the name of the company, or their GitHub organization name that created the provider",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "provider_version": {
        "description": "The version of the Terraform provider to retrieve in the format 'x.y.z', or 'latest' to get the latest version",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "service_slug": {
        "description": "The slug of the service you want to deploy or read using the Terraform provider, prefer using a single word, use underscores for multiple words and if unsure about the service_slug, use the provider_name for its value",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_provider_details`

```json
"properties": {
    "provider_doc_id": {
        "description": "Exact tfprovider-compatible provider_doc_id, (e.g., '8894603', '8906901') retrieved from 'search_providers'",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_latest_provider_version`

```json
"properties": {
    "name": {
        "description": "The name of the Terraform provider, e.g., 'aws', 'azurerm', 'google', etc.",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "namespace": {
        "description": "The namespace of the Terraform provider, typically the name of the company, or their GitHub organization name that created the provider e.g., 'hashicorp'",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

#### Modules

##### `search_modules`

```json
"properties": {
    "module_query": {
        "description": "The query to search for Terraform modules.",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_module_details`

```json
"properties": {
    "module_id": {
        "description": "Exact valid and compatible module_id retrieved from search_modules (e.g., 'squareops/terraform-kubernetes-mongodb/mongodb/2.1.1', 'GoogleCloudPlatform/vertex-ai/google/0.2.0')",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_latest_module_version`

```json
"properties": {
    "module_name": {
        "description": "The name of the module, this is usually the service or group of service the user is deploying e.g., 'security-group', 'secrets-manager' etc.",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "module_provider": {
        "description": "The name of the Terraform provider for the module, e.g., 'aws', 'google', 'azurerm' etc.",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "module_publisher": {
        "description": "The publisher of the module, e.g., 'hashicorp', 'aws-ia', 'terraform-google-modules', 'Azure' etc.",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

#### Policies

##### `search_policies`

```json
"properties": {
    "policy_query": {
        "description": "The query to search for Terraform modules.",
        "type": "string"
    }
```

##### `get_policy_details`

```json
"properties": {
    "terraform_policy_id": {
        "description": "Matching terraform_policy_id retrieved from the 'search_policies' tool (e.g., 'policies/hashicorp/CIS-Policy-Set-for-AWS-Terraform/1.0.1')",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

### Available tools for Terraform Enterprise

| Toolset   | Tool               | Description                                                                |
|-----------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `orgs`    | list_organizations | Lists all Terraform organizations accessible to the authenticated user.    |
| `projects`| list_projects      | Lists all projects within a specified Terraform organization.              |

## Example Tool Invocations

**Search for the latest IBM provider version**

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/rpc" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "terraform-server-get-latest-provider-version",
    "params": {
        "name": "ibm",
        "namespace": "IBM-Cloud"
    }
}' | jq -r '.result.content[0].text'
```

**Search for AWS provider overview information**

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/rpc" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "terraform-server-search-providers",
    "params": {
      "provider_data_type": "overview",
      "provider_name": "aws",
      "provider_namespace": "hashicorp",
      "provider_version": "latest",
      "service_slug": "aws"
    }
}' | jq -r '.result.content[0].text'
```

The command above outputs a server log containing the document ID:
```log
INFO[38080] [DEBUG] GET https://registry.terraform.io/v2/provider-docs/9983624
```
The document ID is used in the execution of the next tool.

**Search AWS provider details**

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/rpc" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "terraform-server-get-provider-details",
    "params": {
        "provider_doc_id": "9983624"
    }
}' | jq -r '.result.content[0].text'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Server Health Check

```shell
# Run a Health Check on the Terraform MCP Server
curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/health
```

### Connection issues

```shell
# Test direct connection to Terraform MCP server
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8080/mcp/ \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "method": "initialize",
    "params": {},
    "id": 1
  }'
```

### Docker container issues

```shell
# Check container logs
docker ps --filter "ancestor=terraform-mcp-server:dev" --format "{{.ID}}"
```

## Additional Resources

* [Terraform MCP Server Repository](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server/tree/main)
* [MCP Gateway Documentation](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/main/docs/docs/using/index.md)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/servers/hashicorp/terraform.md, after:

# Terraform MCP Server

## Overview

The Terraform MCP Server is a [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/getting-started/intro) server that enables seamless integration between Terraform and MCP-compatible tools. It provides a consistent, typed interface for querying and interacting with the [Terraform Registry](https://registry.terraform.io/), making it easier to search providers, explore resources and data sources, and retrieve module details.

### Features

➡️ **Supports two transport mechanisms:**

* **Stdio**: Standard input/output streams for direct process communication between local processes on the same machine, providing optimal performance with no network overhead.
* **Streamable HTTP**: Uses HTTP POST for client-to-server messages with optional Server-Sent Events (SSE) for streaming capabilities. This is the recommended transport for remote/distributed setups.

➡️ **Terraform Provider Discovery**: Query and explore Terraform providers and their documentation

➡️ **Module Search & Analysis**: Search and retrieve detailed information about Terraform modules

➡️ **Registry Integration**: Direct integration with Terraform Registry APIs

➡️ **Container Ready**: Docker support for easy deployment

This makes the Terraform MCP Server a powerful tool for enabling advanced automation and interaction workflows in Infrastructure as Code (IaC) development.

## Prerequisites

* **Go** – Required if you plan to install the server from source. Install [Go](https://go.dev/doc/install).
* **Docker** – Required if you plan to run the server in a container. Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/).
* **jq** – Optional but recommended for formatting JSON output in command results. Install [jq](https://jqlang.org/download/).

## Installation And Setup

### Option 1: Install from source (Go)

#### Install the latest release version
```shell
go install github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server/cmd/terraform-mcp-server@latest
```
#### Install the main branch from source
```shell
go install github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server/cmd/terraform-mcp-server@main
```

### Option 2: Build The Image (Docker)

```shell
# Clone the source repository
git clone https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server.git && cd terraform-mcp-server
# Build the docker image
make docker-build
```

### Sessions Mode In Streamable HTTP Transport

The Terraform MCP Server supports two session modes when using the Streamable HTTP transport:

**Stateful Mode (Default)**: Maintains session state between requests, enabling context-aware operations.

**Stateless Mode**: Each request is processed independently without maintaining session state, which can be useful for high-availability deployments or when using load balancers.
To enable stateless mode, set the environment variable: `export MCP_SESSION_MODE=stateless`

### Environment Variables Configuration

| Variable               | Description                                              | Default     |
|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| `TRANSPORT_MODE`       | Set to `streamable-http` to enable HTTP transport (legacy `http` value still supported) | `stdio`     |
| `TRANSPORT_HOST`       | Host to bind the HTTP server                             | `127.0.0.1` |
| `TRANSPORT_PORT`       | HTTP server port                                         | `8080`      |
| `MCP_ENDPOINT`         | HTTP server endpoint path                                | `/mcp`      |
| `MCP_SESSION_MODE`     | Session mode: `stateful` or `stateless`                  | `stateful`  |
| `MCP_ALLOWED_ORIGINS`  | Comma-separated list of allowed origins for CORS         | `""` (empty)|
| `MCP_CORS_MODE`        | CORS mode: `strict`, `development`, or `disabled`        | `strict`    |
| `MCP_RATE_LIMIT_GLOBAL`| Global rate limit (format: `rps:burst`)                  | `10:20`     |
| `MCP_RATE_LIMIT_SESSION`| Per-session rate limit (format: `rps:burst`)            | `5:10`      |

### Starting the Server

#### [Go] Running the server in Stdio mode

```shell
terraform-mcp-server stdio [--log-file /path/to/log]
```

#### [Go] Running the server in Streamable HTTP mode

```shell
terraform-mcp-server streamable-http [--transport-port 8080] [--transport-host 127.0.0.1] [--mcp-endpoint /mcp] [--log-file /path/to/log]
```

#### [Docker] Running the server in Stdio mode

```shell
docker run -i --rm terraform-mcp-server:dev
```

#### [Docker] Running the server in Streamable HTTP mode

```shell
docker run -p 8080:8080 --rm -e TRANSPORT_MODE=streamable-http -e TRANSPORT_HOST=0.0.0.0 terraform-mcp-server:dev
```

### Server endpoint

Given your configuration, the endpoint could be the following:

* Server: `http://{hostname}:8080/mcp`

## ContextForge Integration

> Set the following environment variables on your system, as they will be used in subsequent commands for the ContextForge integration.

```shell
export MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL=""       # e.g: http://mcp.gateway.com:4444
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=""   # e.g: gateway-bearer-token
```

### Registration With ContextForge

```shell
# Registering the Terraform Server in Streamable HTTP mode
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/gateways" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "name": "terraform_server",
    "url": "http://127.0.0.1:8080/mcp",
    "description": "Terraform MCP Server",
    "transport": "STREAMABLEHTTP"
}' | jq
```

### Obtain IDs for available tools

```shell
# Lists Terraform tools from the registered server, fetches their IDs, and exports them as environment variables (TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_1 … TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_8)
i=1; for id in $(curl --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/tools" --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq -r '.[].id'); do export TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_$i="$id"; echo "TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_$i=$id"; i=$((i+1)); done
```

### Create Virtual Server And Expose The Terraform Tools

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/servers" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "name": "terraform_server",
    "description": "Terraform MCP Server with module search and registry integration",
    "associatedTools": [
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_1'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_2'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_3'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_4'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_5'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_6'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_7'",
        "'$TERRAFORM_TOOL_ID_8'"
    ]
}' | jq
```

### Retrieve Exposed Terraform Tools

```shell
export TERRAFORM_SERVER_ID="" # Virtual Server ID returned by the previous command
curl --request GET \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/servers/${TERRAFORM_SERVER_ID}/tools" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" | jq
```

### Available Tools

#### Providers

##### `search_providers`

```json
"properties": {
    "provider_data_type": {
        "default": "resources",
        "description": "The type of the document to retrieve, for general information use 'guides', for deploying resources use 'resources', for reading pre-deployed resources use 'data-sources', for functions use 'functions', and for overview of the provider use 'overview'",
        "enum": [
            "resources",
            "data-sources",
            "functions",
            "guides",
            "overview"
        ],
        "type": "string"
    },
    "provider_name": {
        "description": "The name of the Terraform provider to perform the read or deployment operation",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "provider_namespace": {
        "description": "The publisher of the Terraform provider, typically the name of the company, or their GitHub organization name that created the provider",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "provider_version": {
        "description": "The version of the Terraform provider to retrieve in the format 'x.y.z', or 'latest' to get the latest version",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "service_slug": {
        "description": "The slug of the service you want to deploy or read using the Terraform provider, prefer using a single word, use underscores for multiple words and if unsure about the service_slug, use the provider_name for its value",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_provider_details`

```json
"properties": {
    "provider_doc_id": {
        "description": "Exact tfprovider-compatible provider_doc_id, (e.g., '8894603', '8906901') retrieved from 'search_providers'",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_latest_provider_version`

```json
"properties": {
    "name": {
        "description": "The name of the Terraform provider, e.g., 'aws', 'azurerm', 'google', etc.",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "namespace": {
        "description": "The namespace of the Terraform provider, typically the name of the company, or their GitHub organization name that created the provider e.g., 'hashicorp'",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

#### Modules

##### `search_modules`

```json
"properties": {
    "module_query": {
        "description": "The query to search for Terraform modules.",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_module_details`

```json
"properties": {
    "module_id": {
        "description": "Exact valid and compatible module_id retrieved from search_modules (e.g., 'squareops/terraform-kubernetes-mongodb/mongodb/2.1.1', 'GoogleCloudPlatform/vertex-ai/google/0.2.0')",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

##### `get_latest_module_version`

```json
"properties": {
    "module_name": {
        "description": "The name of the module, this is usually the service or group of service the user is deploying e.g., 'security-group', 'secrets-manager' etc.",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "module_provider": {
        "description": "The name of the Terraform provider for the module, e.g., 'aws', 'google', 'azurerm' etc.",
        "type": "string"
    },
    "module_publisher": {
        "description": "The publisher of the module, e.g., 'hashicorp', 'aws-ia', 'terraform-google-modules', 'Azure' etc.",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

#### Policies

##### `search_policies`

```json
"properties": {
    "policy_query": {
        "description": "The query to search for Terraform modules.",
        "type": "string"
    }
```

##### `get_policy_details`

```json
"properties": {
    "terraform_policy_id": {
        "description": "Matching terraform_policy_id retrieved from the 'search_policies' tool (e.g., 'policies/hashicorp/CIS-Policy-Set-for-AWS-Terraform/1.0.1')",
        "type": "string"
    }
}
```

### Available tools for Terraform Enterprise

| Toolset   | Tool               | Description                                                                |
|-----------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `orgs`    | list_organizations | Lists all Terraform organizations accessible to the authenticated user.    |
| `projects`| list_projects      | Lists all projects within a specified Terraform organization.              |

## Example Tool Invocations

**Search for the latest IBM provider version**

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/rpc" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "terraform-server-get-latest-provider-version",
    "params": {
        "name": "ibm",
        "namespace": "IBM-Cloud"
    }
}' | jq -r '.result.content[0].text'
```

**Search for AWS provider overview information**

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/rpc" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "terraform-server-search-providers",
    "params": {
      "provider_data_type": "overview",
      "provider_name": "aws",
      "provider_namespace": "hashicorp",
      "provider_version": "latest",
      "service_slug": "aws"
    }
}' | jq -r '.result.content[0].text'
```

The command above outputs a server log containing the document ID:
```log
INFO[38080] [DEBUG] GET https://registry.terraform.io/v2/provider-docs/9983624
```
The document ID is used in the execution of the next tool.

**Search AWS provider details**

```shell
curl --request POST \
  --url "${MCPGATEWAY_BASE_URL}/rpc" \
  --header "Authorization: Bearer ${MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN}" \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "terraform-server-get-provider-details",
    "params": {
        "provider_doc_id": "9983624"
    }
}' | jq -r '.result.content[0].text'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Server Health Check

```shell
# Run a Health Check on the Terraform MCP Server
curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/health
```

### Connection issues

```shell
# Test direct connection to Terraform MCP server
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8080/mcp/ \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "method": "initialize",
    "params": {},
    "id": 1
  }'
```

### Docker container issues

```shell
# Check container logs
docker ps --filter "ancestor=terraform-mcp-server:dev" --format "{{.ID}}"
```

## Additional Resources

* [Terraform MCP Server Repository](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-mcp-server/tree/main)
* [ContextForge Documentation](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/blob/main/docs/docs/using/index.md)
