docs/docs/overview/features.md, before:

# ✨ Features Overview

MCP Gateway is a **gateway + registry + proxy** purpose-built for the **Model Context Protocol (MCP)**. It unifies REST, MCP, and stdio worlds while
adding auth, caching, federation, and an HTMX-powered Admin UI.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`


---

## 🌐 Multi-Transport Core

???+ abstract "Supported Transports"

    | Transport | Description | Typical Use-case |
    |-----------|-------------|------------------|
    | **HTTP / JSON-RPC** | Low-latency request-response, default for most REST clients | Simple tool invocations |
    | **WebSocket** | Bi-directional, full-duplex | Streaming chat or incremental tool results |
    | **Server-Sent Events (SSE)** | Uni-directional server → client stream | LLM completions or real-time updates |
    | **STDIO** | Local process pipes via `mcpgateway-wrapper` | Editor plugins, headless CLI clients |

??? example "Try it: SSE from curl"

    ```bash
    curl -N -H "Accept: text/event-stream" \
         -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         http://localhost:4444/servers/UUID_OF_SERVER_1/sse
    ```

---


## 🔐 Security

??? tip "Auth mechanisms"

    * **JWT bearer** (default, signed with `JWT_SECRET_KEY`)
    * **Email/password** for the Admin UI (`PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL` / `PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD`)
    * **HTTP Basic** (optional) for API/docs when `API_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true` or `DOCS_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true`
    * **Custom headers** (e.g., API keys) per tool or gateway

??? info "Rate limiting"

    Set `MAX_TOOL_CALLS_PER_MINUTE` to throttle abusive clients.
    Exceeding the limit returns **HTTP 429** with a `Retry-After` header.

??? example "Generate a 24 h token"

    ```bash
    python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token \
      --username alice --exp 1440 --secret "$JWT_SECRET_KEY"
    ```

---

## 🛠 Tool & Server Registry

??? success "What you can register"

    | Registry | Entities | Notes |
    |----------|----------|-------|
    | **Tools** | Native MCP tools or wrapped REST / CLI functions | JSON Schema input validation |
    | **Resources** | URIs for blobs, text, images | Optional SSE change notifications |
    | **Prompts** | Jinja2 templates + multimodal content | Versioning & rollback |
    | **Servers** | Virtual collections of tools/prompts/resources | Exposed as full MCP servers |
    | **gRPC Services** | gRPC microservices via automatic reflection | Protocol translation to MCP/JSON |

??? code "REST tool example"

    ```bash
    curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
         -d '{
               "name": "joke_api",
               "url": "https://icanhazdadjoke.com/",
               "requestType": "GET",
               "integrationType": "REST",
               "headers": {"Accept":"application/json"}
             }' \
         http://localhost:4444/tools
    ```

---

## 🔌 gRPC-to-MCP Translation

??? success "Automatic gRPC Integration"

    * **Server Reflection** - Automatically discovers gRPC services and methods
    * **Protocol Translation** - Converts between gRPC/Protobuf ↔ MCP/JSON
    * **Zero Configuration** - No manual schema definition required
    * **TLS Support** - Secure connections to gRPC servers
    * **Metadata Headers** - Custom gRPC metadata for authentication
    * **Admin UI** - Manage gRPC services via web interface

??? code "Register a gRPC service"

    ```bash
    # CLI: Expose gRPC service via HTTP/SSE
    python3 -m mcpgateway.translate --grpc localhost:50051 --port 9000

    # REST API: Register for persistence
    curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
         -d '{
               "name": "payment-service",
               "target": "payments.example.com:50051",
               "reflection_enabled": true,
               "tls_enabled": true
             }' \
         http://localhost:4444/grpc
    ```

??? info "How it works"

    1. Gateway connects to gRPC server using [Server Reflection Protocol](https://grpc.io/docs/guides/reflection/)
    2. Discovers all available services and methods automatically
    3. Translates Protobuf messages to/from JSON
    4. Exposes each gRPC method as an MCP tool
    5. Handles streaming (unary and server-streaming)

??? example "Supported gRPC features"

    | Feature | Status | Notes |
    |---------|--------|-------|
    | Unary RPCs | ✅ Supported | Request-response methods |
    | Server Streaming | ⚠️ Partial | Basic support implemented |
    | Client Streaming | 🚧 Planned | Future enhancement |
    | Bidirectional Streaming | 🚧 Planned | Future enhancement |
    | TLS/mTLS | ✅ Supported | Certificate-based auth |
    | Metadata Headers | ✅ Supported | Custom headers for auth |
    | Reflection | ✅ Required | Auto-discovery mechanism |

---

## 🖥 Admin UI

??? abstract "Built with"

    * **FastAPI** + Jinja2 + HTMX + Alpine.js
    * Tailwind CSS for styling

??? info "📊 Audit & Metadata Tracking"

    * **Comprehensive metadata** for all entities (Tools, Resources, Prompts, Servers, Gateways)
    * **Creation tracking** - who, when, from where, how
    * **Modification history** - change attribution and versioning
    * **Federation source** tracking for MCP server entities
    * **Bulk import** batch identification
    * **Auth-agnostic** - works with/without authentication
    * **Backwards compatible** - legacy entities show graceful fallbacks

---

## 🗄 Persistence, Caching & Observability

??? info "Storage options"

    * **SQLite** (default dev)
    * **PostgreSQL**, **MySQL/MariaDB**, **MongoDB** - via `DATABASE_URL`

??? example "Redis cache"

    ```env
    CACHE_TYPE=redis
    REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0
    ```

??? abstract "Observability"

    * Structured JSON logs (tap with `jq`)
    * `/metrics` - Prometheus-friendly counters (`tool_calls_total`, `gateway_up`)
    * `/health` - readiness + dependency checks

---

## 🧩 Dev & Extensibility

??? summary "Highlights"

    * **Makefile targets** - `make dev`, `make test`, `make lint`
    * **400+ unit tests** - Pytest + HTTPX TestClient
    * **VS Code Dev Container** - Python 3.11 + Docker/Podman CLI
    * **Plug-in friendly** - drop-in FastAPI routers or Pydantic models

---

## Next Steps

* **Hands-on Walk-through** → [Quick Start](quick_start.md)
* **Deployment Guides** → [Compose](../deployment/compose.md), [K8s & Cloud](../deployment/index.md)
* **Admin UI deep dive** → [UI Guide](ui.md)

!!! success "Ready to explore"
    With transports, federation, and security handled for you, focus on building great **MCP tools, prompts, and agents**-the gateway has your back.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/overview/features.md, after:

# ✨ Features Overview

**ContextForge** is an AI gateway that unifies tools, agents, models, and APIs — providing MCP federation, LLM proxy, agent routing, rate limiting, auth, caching, and an HTMX-powered Admin UI.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`


---

## 🌐 Multi-Transport Core

???+ abstract "Supported Transports"

    | Transport | Description | Typical Use-case |
    |-----------|-------------|------------------|
    | **HTTP / JSON-RPC** | Low-latency request-response, default for most REST clients | Simple tool invocations |
    | **WebSocket** | Bi-directional, full-duplex | Streaming chat or incremental tool results |
    | **Server-Sent Events (SSE)** | Uni-directional server → client stream | LLM completions or real-time updates |
    | **STDIO** | Local process pipes via `mcpgateway-wrapper` | Editor plugins, headless CLI clients |

??? example "Try it: SSE from curl"

    ```bash
    curl -N -H "Accept: text/event-stream" \
         -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         http://localhost:4444/servers/UUID_OF_SERVER_1/sse
    ```

---


## 🔐 Security

??? tip "Auth mechanisms"

    * **JWT bearer** (default, signed with `JWT_SECRET_KEY`)
    * **Email/password** for the Admin UI (`PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL` / `PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD`)
    * **HTTP Basic** (optional) for API/docs when `API_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true` or `DOCS_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true`
    * **Custom headers** (e.g., API keys) per tool or gateway

??? info "Rate limiting"

    Set `MAX_TOOL_CALLS_PER_MINUTE` to throttle abusive clients.
    Exceeding the limit returns **HTTP 429** with a `Retry-After` header.

??? example "Generate a 24 h token"

    ```bash
    python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token \
      --username alice --exp 1440 --secret "$JWT_SECRET_KEY"
    ```

---

## 🛠 Tool & Server Registry

??? success "What you can register"

    | Registry | Entities | Notes |
    |----------|----------|-------|
    | **Tools** | Native MCP tools or wrapped REST / CLI functions | JSON Schema input validation |
    | **Resources** | URIs for blobs, text, images | Optional SSE change notifications |
    | **Prompts** | Jinja2 templates + multimodal content | Versioning & rollback |
    | **Servers** | Virtual collections of tools/prompts/resources | Exposed as full MCP servers |
    | **gRPC Services** | gRPC microservices via automatic reflection | Protocol translation to MCP/JSON |

??? code "REST tool example"

    ```bash
    curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
         -d '{
               "name": "joke_api",
               "url": "https://icanhazdadjoke.com/",
               "requestType": "GET",
               "integrationType": "REST",
               "headers": {"Accept":"application/json"}
             }' \
         http://localhost:4444/tools
    ```

---

## 🔌 gRPC-to-MCP Translation

??? success "Automatic gRPC Integration"

    * **Server Reflection** - Automatically discovers gRPC services and methods
    * **Protocol Translation** - Converts between gRPC/Protobuf ↔ MCP/JSON
    * **Zero Configuration** - No manual schema definition required
    * **TLS Support** - Secure connections to gRPC servers
    * **Metadata Headers** - Custom gRPC metadata for authentication
    * **Admin UI** - Manage gRPC services via web interface

??? code "Register a gRPC service"

    ```bash
    # CLI: Expose gRPC service via HTTP/SSE
    python3 -m mcpgateway.translate --grpc localhost:50051 --port 9000

    # REST API: Register for persistence
    curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
         -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
         -d '{
               "name": "payment-service",
               "target": "payments.example.com:50051",
               "reflection_enabled": true,
               "tls_enabled": true
             }' \
         http://localhost:4444/grpc
    ```

??? info "How it works"

    1. Gateway connects to gRPC server using [Server Reflection Protocol](https://grpc.io/docs/guides/reflection/)
    2. Discovers all available services and methods automatically
    3. Translates Protobuf messages to/from JSON
    4. Exposes each gRPC method as an MCP tool
    5. Handles streaming (unary and server-streaming)

??? example "Supported gRPC features"

    | Feature | Status | Notes |
    |---------|--------|-------|
    | Unary RPCs | ✅ Supported | Request-response methods |
    | Server Streaming | ⚠️ Partial | Basic support implemented |
    | Client Streaming | 🚧 Planned | Future enhancement |
    | Bidirectional Streaming | 🚧 Planned | Future enhancement |
    | TLS/mTLS | ✅ Supported | Certificate-based auth |
    | Metadata Headers | ✅ Supported | Custom headers for auth |
    | Reflection | ✅ Required | Auto-discovery mechanism |

---

## 🖥 Admin UI

??? abstract "Built with"

    * **FastAPI** + Jinja2 + HTMX + Alpine.js
    * Tailwind CSS for styling

??? info "📊 Audit & Metadata Tracking"

    * **Comprehensive metadata** for all entities (Tools, Resources, Prompts, Servers, Gateways)
    * **Creation tracking** - who, when, from where, how
    * **Modification history** - change attribution and versioning
    * **Federation source** tracking for MCP server entities
    * **Bulk import** batch identification
    * **Auth-agnostic** - works with/without authentication
    * **Backwards compatible** - legacy entities show graceful fallbacks

---

## 🗄 Persistence, Caching & Observability

??? info "Storage options"

    * **SQLite** (default dev)
    * **PostgreSQL**, **MySQL/MariaDB**, **MongoDB** - via `DATABASE_URL`

??? example "Redis cache"

    ```env
    CACHE_TYPE=redis
    REDIS_URL=redis://localhost:6379/0
    ```

??? abstract "Observability"

    * Structured JSON logs (tap with `jq`)
    * `/metrics` - Prometheus-friendly counters (`tool_calls_total`, `gateway_up`)
    * `/health` - readiness + dependency checks

---

## 🧩 Dev & Extensibility

??? summary "Highlights"

    * **Makefile targets** - `make dev`, `make test`, `make lint`
    * **400+ unit tests** - Pytest + HTTPX TestClient
    * **VS Code Dev Container** - Python 3.11 + Docker/Podman CLI
    * **Plug-in friendly** - drop-in FastAPI routers or Pydantic models

---

## Next Steps

* **Hands-on Walk-through** → [Quick Start](quick_start.md)
* **Deployment Guides** → [Compose](../deployment/compose.md), [K8s & Cloud](../deployment/index.md)
* **Admin UI deep dive** → [UI Guide](ui.md)

!!! success "Ready to explore"
    With transports, federation, and security handled for you, focus on building great **MCP tools, prompts, and agents**-the gateway has your back.
