docs/docs/overview/tags.md, before:

# 🏷️ Tags System

MCP Gateway provides a comprehensive tag system for organizing and filtering entities. Tags help categorize tools, resources, prompts, servers, and gateways, making them easier to discover and manage.

---

## 📋 Overview

Tags are metadata labels that can be attached to any entity in MCP Gateway:

- **Tools** - Categorize by functionality (e.g., `api`, `database`, `utility`)
- **Resources** - Group by content type (e.g., `documentation`, `config`, `data`)
- **Prompts** - Organize by purpose (e.g., `coding`, `analysis`, `creative`)
- **Servers** - Tag by environment (e.g., `production`, `development`, `testing`)
- **Gateways** - Label federated gateways (e.g., `cloud`, `on-premise`, `partner`)
- **A2A Agents** - Classify AI agents (e.g., `openai`, `anthropic`, `assistant`, `custom`)

!!! info "Tag Format"

    - Tags are automatically normalized to lowercase
    - Length: 2-50 characters
    - Allowed characters: letters, numbers, hyphens, colons, dots
    - Spaces and underscores automatically converted to hyphens
    - Stored as JSON arrays in the database
    - Displayed as comma-separated values in forms

---

## 🎯 Quick Start

### Using the Admin UI

1. **View Tags**: All entity tables display tags as blue badges
2. **Filter by Tags**: Use the tag filter boxes to find entities
3. **Add Tags**: Include tags when creating entities (comma-separated)
4. **Edit Tags**: Modify tags through edit modals
5. **Browse All Tags**: Visit `/admin/tags` to see all tags and their usage

### Using the REST API

All CRUD operations support tags through the REST API with JWT authentication.

---

## 🔍 Tag Discovery API

### List All Tags

Get all unique tags across the system with statistics:

=== "Request"
    ```bash
    GET /tags
    ```

=== "Parameters"
    | Parameter | Type | Description | Default |
    |-----------|------|-------------|---------|
    | `entity_types` | string | Comma-separated: tools, resources, prompts, servers, gateways | All |
    | `include_entities` | boolean | Include entities that have each tag | false |

=== "Response (Statistics Only)"
    ```json
    [
      {
        "name": "api",
        "stats": {
          "tools": 5,
          "resources": 2,
          "prompts": 1,
          "servers": 3,
          "gateways": 0,
          "total": 11
        },
        "entities": []
      }
    ]
    ```

=== "Response (With Entities)"
    ```json
    [
      {
        "name": "api",
        "stats": {
          "tools": 2,
          "resources": 1,
          "prompts": 0,
          "servers": 1,
          "gateways": 0,
          "total": 4
        },
        "entities": [
          {
            "id": "tool-123",
            "name": "REST Client",
            "type": "tool",
            "description": "Make HTTP requests"
          },
          {
            "id": "resource://api-docs",
            "name": "API Documentation",
            "type": "resource",
            "description": null
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
    ```

### Get Entities by Tag

Retrieve all entities that have a specific tag:

=== "Request"
    ```bash
    GET /tags/{tag_name}/entities
    ```

=== "Parameters"
    | Parameter | Type | Description | Default |
    |-----------|------|-------------|---------|
    | `tag_name` | string | The tag to search for (path parameter) | Required |
    | `entity_types` | string | Comma-separated entity types to filter | All |

=== "Response"
    ```json
    [
      {
        "id": "tool-123",
        "name": "REST Client",
        "type": "tool",
        "description": "Make HTTP requests to REST APIs"
      },
      {
        "id": "server-789",
        "name": "API Gateway Server",
        "type": "server",
        "description": "Central API gateway"
      }
    ]
    ```

### Admin Tags Endpoint

The admin endpoint provides UI-optimized formatting:

```bash
GET /admin/tags?include_entities=true
```

Returns the same data in a flattened structure for easier UI rendering.

---

## ✨ Tag Normalization

MCP Gateway automatically normalizes tags to ensure consistency and prevent duplicates:

### **Automatic Transformations**

- **Case Conversion**: `"Finance"` → `"finance"`
- **Space Replacement**: `"Machine Learning"` → `"machine-learning"`
- **Underscore Replacement**: `"web_development"` → `"web-development"`
- **Whitespace Trimming**: `"  api  "` → `"api"`
- **Multiple Hyphen Reduction**: `"a--b---c"` → `"a-b-c"`
- **Invalid Character Removal**: `"api@#$"` → `"api"`

### **Validation Rules**

| Rule | Description | Example |
|------|-------------|---------|
| **Minimum Length** | Tags must be at least 2 characters | ❌ `"a"` → Error |
| **Maximum Length** | Tags cannot exceed 50 characters | ❌ `"this-is-a-very-long-tag-that-exceeds-fifty-chars"` → Error |
| **Allowed Characters** | Letters, numbers, hyphens, colons, dots | ✅ `"api:v2.0"` |
| **No Leading/Trailing Hyphens** | Hyphens removed from edges | `"-api-"` → `"api"` |

---

## 📝 Examples

### Creating Entities with Tags

=== "Tools"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/tools \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "name": "Database Query Tool",
        "description": "Execute SQL queries",
        "input_schema": {...},
        "tags": ["database", "sql", "query"]
      }'
    ```

=== "Resources"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/resources \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "uri": "resource://config/database",
        "name": "Database Configuration",
        "content": "...",
        "tags": ["config", "database", "settings"]
      }'
    ```

=== "Prompts"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/prompts \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "name": "SQL Generator",
        "template": "Generate SQL for: {query}",
        "arguments": [...],
        "tags": ["sql", "generation", "database"]
      }'
    ```

=== "Servers"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/servers \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "name": "Development Server",
        "description": "Local development environment",
        "tags": ["development", "local", "testing"]
      }'
    ```

### Filtering by Tags

When listing entities, filter by tags using the `tags` parameter:

=== "List Tools"
    ```bash
    # Get tools with "api" OR "database" tags
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tools?tags=api,database"
    ```

=== "List Resources"
    ```bash
    # Get resources with "config" tag
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/resources?tags=config"
    ```

=== "List Prompts"
    ```bash
    # Get prompts with "generation" tag
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/prompts?tags=generation"
    ```

### Tag Discovery Examples

=== "Find All Database Tools"
    ```bash
    # Get all entities tagged with "database"
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tags/database/entities?entity_types=tools"
    ```

=== "Get Tag Statistics"
    ```bash
    # See how many entities use each tag
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tags" | jq '.[] | {name: .name, total: .stats.total}'
    ```

=== "Find Popular Tags"
    ```bash
    # Get top 10 most used tags
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tags" | \
      jq 'sort_by(-.stats.total) | .[0:10] | .[] | {name: .name, count: .stats.total}'
    ```

---

## 🏆 Best Practices

### Naming Conventions

!!! tip "Recommended Tag Patterns"

    - **Functionality**: `auth`, `database`, `api`, `file-system`
    - **Environment**: `dev`, `test`, `staging`, `prod`
    - **Domain**: `finance`, `hr`, `sales`, `engineering`
    - **Access Level**: `public`, `internal`, `restricted`, `admin`
    - **Version**: `v1`, `v2`, `beta`, `deprecated`

### Tag Strategies

=== "By Functionality"
    Group entities by what they do:

    - `auth` - Authentication/authorization
    - `database` - Database operations
    - `api` - External API interactions
    - `file` - File system operations
    - `cache` - Caching mechanisms

=== "By Environment"
    Separate by deployment environment:

    - `dev` - Development only
    - `test` - Testing environment
    - `staging` - Pre-production
    - `prod` - Production ready
    - `local` - Local development

=== "By Access Control"
    Control visibility and access:

    - `public` - Available to all users
    - `internal` - Internal use only
    - `restricted` - Requires special permissions
    - `admin` - Administrator only
    - `beta` - Beta features

### Tag Management Guidelines

| Guideline | Description | Example |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| **Keep it Simple** | Use clear, descriptive tags | ✅ `database` ❌ `db-stuff` |
| **Be Consistent** | Use the same tag across entities | ✅ All use `api` ❌ Mix of `api`, `API`, `apis` |
| **Limit Quantity** | 3-5 tags per entity is optimal | ✅ `[api, auth, v2]` ❌ 10+ tags |
| **Document Tags** | Maintain a tag glossary | Create a reference document |
| **Regular Review** | Audit and clean up unused tags | Quarterly tag review |

---

## 🔧 Integration Examples

### Python Client

```python
import httpx
from typing import List, Dict, Any, Optional

class MCPTagClient:
    def __init__(self, base_url: str, token: str):
        self.base_url = base_url
        self.headers = {"Authorization": f"Bearer {token}"}

    def get_tags(
        self,
        entity_types: Optional[List[str]] = None,
        include_entities: bool = False
    ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
        """Get all tags with optional filtering."""
        params = {}
        if entity_types:
            params["entity_types"] = ",".join(entity_types)
        if include_entities:
            params["include_entities"] = "true"

        response = httpx.get(
            f"{self.base_url}/tags",
            params=params,
            headers=self.headers
        )
        response.raise_for_status()
        return response.json()

    def get_entities_by_tag(
        self,
        tag: str,
        entity_types: Optional[List[str]] = None
    ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
        """Get all entities with a specific tag."""
        params = {}
        if entity_types:
            params["entity_types"] = ",".join(entity_types)

        response = httpx.get(
            f"{self.base_url}/tags/{tag}/entities",
            params=params,
            headers=self.headers
        )
        response.raise_for_status()
        return response.json()

    def find_related_entities(
        self,
        entity_id: str,
        entity_type: str
    ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
        """Find entities with similar tags."""
        # First, get the entity's tags
        entity = httpx.get(
            f"{self.base_url}/{entity_type}s/{entity_id}",
            headers=self.headers
        ).json()

        # Then find entities with those tags
        related = []
        for tag in entity.get("tags", []):
            entities = self.get_entities_by_tag(tag)
            related.extend([
                e for e in entities
                if e["id"] != entity_id
            ])

        # Deduplicate by ID
        seen = set()
        unique = []
        for e in related:
            if e["id"] not in seen:
                seen.add(e["id"])
                unique.append(e)

        return unique

# Usage
client = MCPTagClient(
    base_url="http://localhost:4444",
    token="your-jwt-token"
)

# Get all tags with statistics
tags = client.get_tags()

# Get all database tools
db_tools = client.get_entities_by_tag(
    "database",
    entity_types=["tools"]
)

# Find related entities
related = client.find_related_entities(
    entity_id="tool-123",
    entity_type="tool"
)
```

### JavaScript/TypeScript

```typescript
interface TagStats {
  tools: number;
  resources: number;
  prompts: number;
  servers: number;
  gateways: number;
  total: number;
}

interface TaggedEntity {
  id: string;
  name: string;
  type: string;
  description?: string;
}

interface TagInfo {
  name: string;
  stats: TagStats;
  entities: TaggedEntity[];
}

class MCPTagClient {
  constructor(
    private baseUrl: string,
    private token: string
  ) {}

  private get headers() {
    return {
      'Authorization': `Bearer ${this.token}`,
      'Content-Type': 'application/json'
    };
  }

  async getTags(
    entityTypes?: string[],
    includeEntities = false
  ): Promise<TagInfo[]> {
    const params = new URLSearchParams();
    if (entityTypes?.length) {
      params.append('entity_types', entityTypes.join(','));
    }
    if (includeEntities) {
      params.append('include_entities', 'true');
    }

    const response = await fetch(
      `${this.baseUrl}/tags?${params}`,
      { headers: this.headers }
    );

    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`Failed to get tags: ${response.statusText}`);
    }

    return response.json();
  }

  async getEntitiesByTag(
    tag: string,
    entityTypes?: string[]
  ): Promise<TaggedEntity[]> {
    const params = new URLSearchParams();
    if (entityTypes?.length) {
      params.append('entity_types', entityTypes.join(','));
    }

    const response = await fetch(
      `${this.baseUrl}/tags/${tag}/entities?${params}`,
      { headers: this.headers }
    );

    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`Failed to get entities: ${response.statusText}`);
    }

    return response.json();
  }

  async createTaggedTool(
    name: string,
    tags: string[],
    inputSchema: any
  ): Promise<any> {
    const response = await fetch(
      `${this.baseUrl}/tools`,
      {
        method: 'POST',
        headers: this.headers,
        body: JSON.stringify({
          name,
          tags,
          input_schema: inputSchema
        })
      }
    );

    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`Failed to create tool: ${response.statusText}`);
    }

    return response.json();
  }
}

// Usage
async function example() {
  const client = new MCPTagClient(
    'http://localhost:4444',
    'your-jwt-token'
  );

  // Get all tags with entities
  const tags = await client.getTags(
    undefined,
    true // include entities
  );

  // Find all API tools
  const apiTools = await client.getEntitiesByTag(
    'api',
    ['tools']
  );

  // Create a new tagged tool
  const newTool = await client.createTaggedTool(
    'My API Tool',
    ['api', 'rest', 'v2'],
    { type: 'object', properties: {} }
  );
}
```

---

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

| Issue | Cause | Solution |
|-------|-------|----------|
| **Tags not appearing** | Incorrect JSON format | Ensure tags are JSON arrays: `["tag1", "tag2"]` |
| **Duplicate tags** | Case differences | Tags are normalized to lowercase automatically |
| **Tag validation errors** | Invalid characters | Use only letters, numbers, hyphens, colons, dots |
| **Empty tag results** | No entities with tag | Verify tag exists with `/tags` endpoint |
| **Tag not updating** | Cache issue | Clear Redis cache if using distributed caching |

### Debugging Commands

```bash
# List all unique tags in the system
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:4444/tags | jq '.[].name'

# Count total entities per tag
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:4444/tags | \
  jq 'map({(.name): .stats.total}) | add'

# Find entities without tags (database query)
psql -d mcp_gateway -c \
  "SELECT id, name FROM tools WHERE tags IS NULL OR tags = '[]';"

# Validate tag format
echo "My_Tag Name" | \
  python3 -c "from mcpgateway.validation.tags import TagValidator; \
  import sys; print(TagValidator.normalize_tag(sys.stdin.read().strip()))"
```

---

## 📚 Advanced Use Cases

### Virtual Server Composition

Create virtual servers that bundle tools by tags:

```python
async def create_tag_based_server(tag: str, db: Session):
    """Create a virtual server with all tools having a specific tag."""

    # Get all tools with the tag
    tools = await tool_service.list_tools(db, tags=[tag])
    tool_ids = [tool.id for tool in tools]

    # Create virtual server
    server = await server_service.create_server(
        db,
        ServerCreate(
            name=f"{tag.title()} Tools Server",
            description=f"Virtual server for {tag} tools",
            tags=["virtual", tag],
            tool_ids=tool_ids
        )
    )

    return server
```

### Access Control by Tags

Implement tag-based access control:

```python
from typing import List, Set

class TagBasedAccessControl:
    """Control access to entities based on tags."""

    ROLE_PERMISSIONS = {
        "admin": {"*"},  # Access all tags
        "developer": {"dev", "test", "internal", "public"},
        "user": {"public"},
        "guest": {"public", "demo"}
    }

    @classmethod
    def filter_by_access(
        cls,
        entities: List[dict],
        user_role: str
    ) -> List[dict]:
        """Filter entities based on user's tag permissions."""
        allowed_tags = cls.ROLE_PERMISSIONS.get(user_role, {"public"})

        if "*" in allowed_tags:
            return entities

        filtered = []
        for entity in entities:
            entity_tags = set(entity.get("tags", []))
            if entity_tags & allowed_tags:  # Has at least one allowed tag
                filtered.append(entity)

        return filtered
```

### Tag-Based Discovery

Discover related entities through shared tags:

```python
async def discover_related(
    entity_type: str,
    entity_id: str,
    db: Session
) -> Dict[str, List]:
    """Find related entities based on shared tags."""

    # Get the source entity
    if entity_type == "tool":
        entity = await tool_service.get_tool(db, entity_id)
    elif entity_type == "resource":
        entity = await resource_service.get_resource(db, entity_id)
    # ... handle other types

    if not entity or not entity.tags:
        return {}

    # Find entities with overlapping tags
    related = {}
    for tag in entity.tags:
        entities = await tag_service.get_entities_by_tag(
            db,
            tag_name=tag
        )

        for e in entities:
            if e.id != entity_id:  # Exclude self
                if e.type not in related:
                    related[e.type] = []
                related[e.type].append(e)

    # Deduplicate and sort by relevance
    for entity_type in related:
        # Count tag overlaps
        overlap_counts = {}
        for e in related[entity_type]:
            overlap = len(set(e.tags) & set(entity.tags))
            overlap_counts[e.id] = overlap

        # Sort by overlap count
        related[entity_type] = sorted(
            related[entity_type],
            key=lambda e: overlap_counts[e.id],
            reverse=True
        )

    return related
```

---

## 🔗 Related Documentation

- [REST API Reference](https://ibm.github.io/mcp-context-forge/api/) - Complete API documentation
- [Admin UI Guide](./ui.md) - Using the web interface
- [Virtual Servers](../architecture/index.md) - Composing servers with tags
- [Federation](../architecture/index.md) - Tag-based gateway discovery

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/overview/tags.md, after:

# 🏷️ Tags System

ContextForge provides a comprehensive tag system for organizing and filtering entities. Tags help categorize tools, resources, prompts, servers, and gateways, making them easier to discover and manage.

---

## 📋 Overview

Tags are metadata labels that can be attached to any entity in ContextForge:

- **Tools** - Categorize by functionality (e.g., `api`, `database`, `utility`)
- **Resources** - Group by content type (e.g., `documentation`, `config`, `data`)
- **Prompts** - Organize by purpose (e.g., `coding`, `analysis`, `creative`)
- **Servers** - Tag by environment (e.g., `production`, `development`, `testing`)
- **Gateways** - Label federated gateways (e.g., `cloud`, `on-premise`, `partner`)
- **A2A Agents** - Classify AI agents (e.g., `openai`, `anthropic`, `assistant`, `custom`)

!!! info "Tag Format"

    - Tags are automatically normalized to lowercase
    - Length: 2-50 characters
    - Allowed characters: letters, numbers, hyphens, colons, dots
    - Spaces and underscores automatically converted to hyphens
    - Stored as JSON arrays in the database
    - Displayed as comma-separated values in forms

---

## 🎯 Quick Start

### Using the Admin UI

1. **View Tags**: All entity tables display tags as blue badges
2. **Filter by Tags**: Use the tag filter boxes to find entities
3. **Add Tags**: Include tags when creating entities (comma-separated)
4. **Edit Tags**: Modify tags through edit modals
5. **Browse All Tags**: Visit `/admin/tags` to see all tags and their usage

### Using the REST API

All CRUD operations support tags through the REST API with JWT authentication.

---

## 🔍 Tag Discovery API

### List All Tags

Get all unique tags across the system with statistics:

=== "Request"
    ```bash
    GET /tags
    ```

=== "Parameters"
    | Parameter | Type | Description | Default |
    |-----------|------|-------------|---------|
    | `entity_types` | string | Comma-separated: tools, resources, prompts, servers, gateways | All |
    | `include_entities` | boolean | Include entities that have each tag | false |

=== "Response (Statistics Only)"
    ```json
    [
      {
        "name": "api",
        "stats": {
          "tools": 5,
          "resources": 2,
          "prompts": 1,
          "servers": 3,
          "gateways": 0,
          "total": 11
        },
        "entities": []
      }
    ]
    ```

=== "Response (With Entities)"
    ```json
    [
      {
        "name": "api",
        "stats": {
          "tools": 2,
          "resources": 1,
          "prompts": 0,
          "servers": 1,
          "gateways": 0,
          "total": 4
        },
        "entities": [
          {
            "id": "tool-123",
            "name": "REST Client",
            "type": "tool",
            "description": "Make HTTP requests"
          },
          {
            "id": "resource://api-docs",
            "name": "API Documentation",
            "type": "resource",
            "description": null
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
    ```

### Get Entities by Tag

Retrieve all entities that have a specific tag:

=== "Request"
    ```bash
    GET /tags/{tag_name}/entities
    ```

=== "Parameters"
    | Parameter | Type | Description | Default |
    |-----------|------|-------------|---------|
    | `tag_name` | string | The tag to search for (path parameter) | Required |
    | `entity_types` | string | Comma-separated entity types to filter | All |

=== "Response"
    ```json
    [
      {
        "id": "tool-123",
        "name": "REST Client",
        "type": "tool",
        "description": "Make HTTP requests to REST APIs"
      },
      {
        "id": "server-789",
        "name": "API Gateway Server",
        "type": "server",
        "description": "Central API gateway"
      }
    ]
    ```

### Admin Tags Endpoint

The admin endpoint provides UI-optimized formatting:

```bash
GET /admin/tags?include_entities=true
```

Returns the same data in a flattened structure for easier UI rendering.

---

## ✨ Tag Normalization

ContextForge automatically normalizes tags to ensure consistency and prevent duplicates:

### **Automatic Transformations**

- **Case Conversion**: `"Finance"` → `"finance"`
- **Space Replacement**: `"Machine Learning"` → `"machine-learning"`
- **Underscore Replacement**: `"web_development"` → `"web-development"`
- **Whitespace Trimming**: `"  api  "` → `"api"`
- **Multiple Hyphen Reduction**: `"a--b---c"` → `"a-b-c"`
- **Invalid Character Removal**: `"api@#$"` → `"api"`

### **Validation Rules**

| Rule | Description | Example |
|------|-------------|---------|
| **Minimum Length** | Tags must be at least 2 characters | ❌ `"a"` → Error |
| **Maximum Length** | Tags cannot exceed 50 characters | ❌ `"this-is-a-very-long-tag-that-exceeds-fifty-chars"` → Error |
| **Allowed Characters** | Letters, numbers, hyphens, colons, dots | ✅ `"api:v2.0"` |
| **No Leading/Trailing Hyphens** | Hyphens removed from edges | `"-api-"` → `"api"` |

---

## 📝 Examples

### Creating Entities with Tags

=== "Tools"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/tools \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "name": "Database Query Tool",
        "description": "Execute SQL queries",
        "input_schema": {...},
        "tags": ["database", "sql", "query"]
      }'
    ```

=== "Resources"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/resources \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "uri": "resource://config/database",
        "name": "Database Configuration",
        "content": "...",
        "tags": ["config", "database", "settings"]
      }'
    ```

=== "Prompts"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/prompts \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "name": "SQL Generator",
        "template": "Generate SQL for: {query}",
        "arguments": [...],
        "tags": ["sql", "generation", "database"]
      }'
    ```

=== "Servers"
    ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/servers \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{
        "name": "Development Server",
        "description": "Local development environment",
        "tags": ["development", "local", "testing"]
      }'
    ```

### Filtering by Tags

When listing entities, filter by tags using the `tags` parameter:

=== "List Tools"
    ```bash
    # Get tools with "api" OR "database" tags
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tools?tags=api,database"
    ```

=== "List Resources"
    ```bash
    # Get resources with "config" tag
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/resources?tags=config"
    ```

=== "List Prompts"
    ```bash
    # Get prompts with "generation" tag
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/prompts?tags=generation"
    ```

### Tag Discovery Examples

=== "Find All Database Tools"
    ```bash
    # Get all entities tagged with "database"
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tags/database/entities?entity_types=tools"
    ```

=== "Get Tag Statistics"
    ```bash
    # See how many entities use each tag
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tags" | jq '.[] | {name: .name, total: .stats.total}'
    ```

=== "Find Popular Tags"
    ```bash
    # Get top 10 most used tags
    curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "http://localhost:4444/tags" | \
      jq 'sort_by(-.stats.total) | .[0:10] | .[] | {name: .name, count: .stats.total}'
    ```

---

## 🏆 Best Practices

### Naming Conventions

!!! tip "Recommended Tag Patterns"

    - **Functionality**: `auth`, `database`, `api`, `file-system`
    - **Environment**: `dev`, `test`, `staging`, `prod`
    - **Domain**: `finance`, `hr`, `sales`, `engineering`
    - **Access Level**: `public`, `internal`, `restricted`, `admin`
    - **Version**: `v1`, `v2`, `beta`, `deprecated`

### Tag Strategies

=== "By Functionality"
    Group entities by what they do:

    - `auth` - Authentication/authorization
    - `database` - Database operations
    - `api` - External API interactions
    - `file` - File system operations
    - `cache` - Caching mechanisms

=== "By Environment"
    Separate by deployment environment:

    - `dev` - Development only
    - `test` - Testing environment
    - `staging` - Pre-production
    - `prod` - Production ready
    - `local` - Local development

=== "By Access Control"
    Control visibility and access:

    - `public` - Available to all users
    - `internal` - Internal use only
    - `restricted` - Requires special permissions
    - `admin` - Administrator only
    - `beta` - Beta features

### Tag Management Guidelines

| Guideline | Description | Example |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| **Keep it Simple** | Use clear, descriptive tags | ✅ `database` ❌ `db-stuff` |
| **Be Consistent** | Use the same tag across entities | ✅ All use `api` ❌ Mix of `api`, `API`, `apis` |
| **Limit Quantity** | 3-5 tags per entity is optimal | ✅ `[api, auth, v2]` ❌ 10+ tags |
| **Document Tags** | Maintain a tag glossary | Create a reference document |
| **Regular Review** | Audit and clean up unused tags | Quarterly tag review |

---

## 🔧 Integration Examples

### Python Client

```python
import httpx
from typing import List, Dict, Any, Optional

class MCPTagClient:
    def __init__(self, base_url: str, token: str):
        self.base_url = base_url
        self.headers = {"Authorization": f"Bearer {token}"}

    def get_tags(
        self,
        entity_types: Optional[List[str]] = None,
        include_entities: bool = False
    ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
        """Get all tags with optional filtering."""
        params = {}
        if entity_types:
            params["entity_types"] = ",".join(entity_types)
        if include_entities:
            params["include_entities"] = "true"

        response = httpx.get(
            f"{self.base_url}/tags",
            params=params,
            headers=self.headers
        )
        response.raise_for_status()
        return response.json()

    def get_entities_by_tag(
        self,
        tag: str,
        entity_types: Optional[List[str]] = None
    ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
        """Get all entities with a specific tag."""
        params = {}
        if entity_types:
            params["entity_types"] = ",".join(entity_types)

        response = httpx.get(
            f"{self.base_url}/tags/{tag}/entities",
            params=params,
            headers=self.headers
        )
        response.raise_for_status()
        return response.json()

    def find_related_entities(
        self,
        entity_id: str,
        entity_type: str
    ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
        """Find entities with similar tags."""
        # First, get the entity's tags
        entity = httpx.get(
            f"{self.base_url}/{entity_type}s/{entity_id}",
            headers=self.headers
        ).json()

        # Then find entities with those tags
        related = []
        for tag in entity.get("tags", []):
            entities = self.get_entities_by_tag(tag)
            related.extend([
                e for e in entities
                if e["id"] != entity_id
            ])

        # Deduplicate by ID
        seen = set()
        unique = []
        for e in related:
            if e["id"] not in seen:
                seen.add(e["id"])
                unique.append(e)

        return unique

# Usage
client = MCPTagClient(
    base_url="http://localhost:4444",
    token="your-jwt-token"
)

# Get all tags with statistics
tags = client.get_tags()

# Get all database tools
db_tools = client.get_entities_by_tag(
    "database",
    entity_types=["tools"]
)

# Find related entities
related = client.find_related_entities(
    entity_id="tool-123",
    entity_type="tool"
)
```

### JavaScript/TypeScript

```typescript
interface TagStats {
  tools: number;
  resources: number;
  prompts: number;
  servers: number;
  gateways: number;
  total: number;
}

interface TaggedEntity {
  id: string;
  name: string;
  type: string;
  description?: string;
}

interface TagInfo {
  name: string;
  stats: TagStats;
  entities: TaggedEntity[];
}

class MCPTagClient {
  constructor(
    private baseUrl: string,
    private token: string
  ) {}

  private get headers() {
    return {
      'Authorization': `Bearer ${this.token}`,
      'Content-Type': 'application/json'
    };
  }

  async getTags(
    entityTypes?: string[],
    includeEntities = false
  ): Promise<TagInfo[]> {
    const params = new URLSearchParams();
    if (entityTypes?.length) {
      params.append('entity_types', entityTypes.join(','));
    }
    if (includeEntities) {
      params.append('include_entities', 'true');
    }

    const response = await fetch(
      `${this.baseUrl}/tags?${params}`,
      { headers: this.headers }
    );

    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`Failed to get tags: ${response.statusText}`);
    }

    return response.json();
  }

  async getEntitiesByTag(
    tag: string,
    entityTypes?: string[]
  ): Promise<TaggedEntity[]> {
    const params = new URLSearchParams();
    if (entityTypes?.length) {
      params.append('entity_types', entityTypes.join(','));
    }

    const response = await fetch(
      `${this.baseUrl}/tags/${tag}/entities?${params}`,
      { headers: this.headers }
    );

    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`Failed to get entities: ${response.statusText}`);
    }

    return response.json();
  }

  async createTaggedTool(
    name: string,
    tags: string[],
    inputSchema: any
  ): Promise<any> {
    const response = await fetch(
      `${this.baseUrl}/tools`,
      {
        method: 'POST',
        headers: this.headers,
        body: JSON.stringify({
          name,
          tags,
          input_schema: inputSchema
        })
      }
    );

    if (!response.ok) {
      throw new Error(`Failed to create tool: ${response.statusText}`);
    }

    return response.json();
  }
}

// Usage
async function example() {
  const client = new MCPTagClient(
    'http://localhost:4444',
    'your-jwt-token'
  );

  // Get all tags with entities
  const tags = await client.getTags(
    undefined,
    true // include entities
  );

  // Find all API tools
  const apiTools = await client.getEntitiesByTag(
    'api',
    ['tools']
  );

  // Create a new tagged tool
  const newTool = await client.createTaggedTool(
    'My API Tool',
    ['api', 'rest', 'v2'],
    { type: 'object', properties: {} }
  );
}
```

---

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

| Issue | Cause | Solution |
|-------|-------|----------|
| **Tags not appearing** | Incorrect JSON format | Ensure tags are JSON arrays: `["tag1", "tag2"]` |
| **Duplicate tags** | Case differences | Tags are normalized to lowercase automatically |
| **Tag validation errors** | Invalid characters | Use only letters, numbers, hyphens, colons, dots |
| **Empty tag results** | No entities with tag | Verify tag exists with `/tags` endpoint |
| **Tag not updating** | Cache issue | Clear Redis cache if using distributed caching |

### Debugging Commands

```bash
# List all unique tags in the system
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:4444/tags | jq '.[].name'

# Count total entities per tag
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  http://localhost:4444/tags | \
  jq 'map({(.name): .stats.total}) | add'

# Find entities without tags (database query)
psql -d mcp_gateway -c \
  "SELECT id, name FROM tools WHERE tags IS NULL OR tags = '[]';"

# Validate tag format
echo "My_Tag Name" | \
  python3 -c "from mcpgateway.validation.tags import TagValidator; \
  import sys; print(TagValidator.normalize_tag(sys.stdin.read().strip()))"
```

---

## 📚 Advanced Use Cases

### Virtual Server Composition

Create virtual servers that bundle tools by tags:

```python
async def create_tag_based_server(tag: str, db: Session):
    """Create a virtual server with all tools having a specific tag."""

    # Get all tools with the tag
    tools = await tool_service.list_tools(db, tags=[tag])
    tool_ids = [tool.id for tool in tools]

    # Create virtual server
    server = await server_service.create_server(
        db,
        ServerCreate(
            name=f"{tag.title()} Tools Server",
            description=f"Virtual server for {tag} tools",
            tags=["virtual", tag],
            tool_ids=tool_ids
        )
    )

    return server
```

### Access Control by Tags

Implement tag-based access control:

```python
from typing import List, Set

class TagBasedAccessControl:
    """Control access to entities based on tags."""

    ROLE_PERMISSIONS = {
        "admin": {"*"},  # Access all tags
        "developer": {"dev", "test", "internal", "public"},
        "user": {"public"},
        "guest": {"public", "demo"}
    }

    @classmethod
    def filter_by_access(
        cls,
        entities: List[dict],
        user_role: str
    ) -> List[dict]:
        """Filter entities based on user's tag permissions."""
        allowed_tags = cls.ROLE_PERMISSIONS.get(user_role, {"public"})

        if "*" in allowed_tags:
            return entities

        filtered = []
        for entity in entities:
            entity_tags = set(entity.get("tags", []))
            if entity_tags & allowed_tags:  # Has at least one allowed tag
                filtered.append(entity)

        return filtered
```

### Tag-Based Discovery

Discover related entities through shared tags:

```python
async def discover_related(
    entity_type: str,
    entity_id: str,
    db: Session
) -> Dict[str, List]:
    """Find related entities based on shared tags."""

    # Get the source entity
    if entity_type == "tool":
        entity = await tool_service.get_tool(db, entity_id)
    elif entity_type == "resource":
        entity = await resource_service.get_resource(db, entity_id)
    # ... handle other types

    if not entity or not entity.tags:
        return {}

    # Find entities with overlapping tags
    related = {}
    for tag in entity.tags:
        entities = await tag_service.get_entities_by_tag(
            db,
            tag_name=tag
        )

        for e in entities:
            if e.id != entity_id:  # Exclude self
                if e.type not in related:
                    related[e.type] = []
                related[e.type].append(e)

    # Deduplicate and sort by relevance
    for entity_type in related:
        # Count tag overlaps
        overlap_counts = {}
        for e in related[entity_type]:
            overlap = len(set(e.tags) & set(entity.tags))
            overlap_counts[e.id] = overlap

        # Sort by overlap count
        related[entity_type] = sorted(
            related[entity_type],
            key=lambda e: overlap_counts[e.id],
            reverse=True
        )

    return related
```

---

## 🔗 Related Documentation

- [REST API Reference](https://ibm.github.io/mcp-context-forge/api/) - Complete API documentation
- [Admin UI Guide](./ui.md) - Using the web interface
- [Virtual Servers](../architecture/index.md) - Composing servers with tags
- [Federation](../architecture/index.md) - Tag-based gateway discovery
