infra/nginx/README.md, before:

# Nginx Caching Proxy for MCP Gateway

High-performance reverse proxy with CDN-like caching capabilities for the MCP Gateway. Provides intelligent caching for static assets, API responses, and schema endpoints with minimal configuration.

## Features

- **Multi-tier caching strategy** with 3 dedicated cache zones
- **Intelligent cache bypass** for mutations (POST/PUT/PATCH/DELETE)
- **CDN-like performance** with stale-while-revalidate patterns
- **WebSocket/SSE support** with proper proxy configuration
- **Cache status headers** for debugging and monitoring
- **Persistent cache storage** using Docker volumes
- **Security headers** and best practices out of the box

## Quick Start

### Start with Docker Compose

```bash
# From repository root
docker-compose up -d nginx

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f nginx

# Access via caching proxy
curl -I http://localhost:8080/health
```

### Verify Caching

```bash
# First request (MISS)
curl -I http://localhost:8080/openapi.json | grep X-Cache-Status
# X-Cache-Status: MISS

# Second request (HIT)
curl -I http://localhost:8080/openapi.json | grep X-Cache-Status
# X-Cache-Status: HIT

# Check cache effectiveness
docker-compose exec nginx du -sh /var/cache/nginx/*
```

## Cache Zones

### 1. Static Assets Cache (`static_cache`)

**Purpose**: Cache CSS, JS, images, fonts
**Size**: 1GB
**TTL**: 30 days
**Patterns**: `*.css`, `*.js`, `*.jpg`, `*.png`, `*.gif`, `*.ico`, `*.svg`, `*.woff`, `*.woff2`, `*.ttf`, `*.eot`, `*.otf`, `*.webp`, `*.avif`

**Benefits**:
- 95%+ cache hit rate for static assets
- 50-90% reduction in backend load
- Near-instant response times (<5ms)

### 2. API Response Cache (`api_cache`)

**Purpose**: Cache read-only API responses
**Size**: 512MB
**TTL**: 5 minutes
**Endpoints**: `/tools`, `/servers`, `/gateways`, `/resources`, `/prompts`, `/tags`, `/a2a`, `/health`, `/version`, `/metrics`

**Benefits**:
- 40-70% reduction in database queries
- 30-50% improvement in API response times
- Reduced database connection pressure

### 3. Schema Cache (`schema_cache`)

**Purpose**: Cache OpenAPI specs and documentation
**Size**: 256MB
**TTL**: 24 hours
**Endpoints**: `/openapi.json`, `/docs`, `/redoc`

**Benefits**:
- 99%+ cache hit rate for schema endpoints
- 80-95% reduction in schema generation overhead
- Sub-millisecond response times

## Cache Bypass Rules

Cache is automatically bypassed for:

- **Mutation methods**: POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE
- **WebSocket connections**: `/servers/*/ws`
- **SSE streams**: `/servers/*/sse`
- **JSON-RPC endpoint**: `/` (root)

## Performance Characteristics

### Expected Cache Hit Rates

| Endpoint Type | Expected Hit Rate | TTL |
|--------------|------------------|-----|
| Static assets | 95-99% | 30 days |
| OpenAPI schema | 99%+ | 24 hours |
| API responses | 40-70% | 5 minutes |
| Admin UI | 30-50% | 1 minute |

### Performance Improvements

| Metric | Without Cache | With Cache | Improvement |
|--------|--------------|-----------|-------------|
| Static asset response time | 20-50ms | 1-5ms | **80-90% faster** |
| OpenAPI schema response time | 50-200ms | 1-10ms | **90-95% faster** |
| API list endpoints | 30-100ms | 5-20ms | **60-80% faster** |
| Backend load (requests/sec) | 1000 | 200-400 | **60-80% reduction** |

### Resource Usage

- **Memory**: ~200-300MB for cache zones + OS overhead
- **Disk**: Up to 1.75GB (1GB + 512MB + 256MB)
- **CPU**: <5% under normal load, <15% during cache invalidation

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

No environment variables required. All configuration is in `nginx.conf`.

### High-Concurrency Tuning

The nginx configuration is optimized for 3000+ concurrent users (e.g., locust load testing). Key settings:

#### Worker Process Settings

```nginx
# nginx.conf - Main context
worker_processes auto;              # One worker per CPU core
worker_rlimit_nofile 65535;         # Max open files per worker
worker_cpu_affinity auto;           # Bind workers to CPUs

events {
    worker_connections 8192;        # Connections per worker (default: 1024)
    use epoll;                      # Linux-optimized event model
    multi_accept on;                # Accept multiple connections at once
    accept_mutex off;               # Disable mutex for better parallelism
}
```

#### Listen Socket Tuning

```nginx
# Server block
listen 80 backlog=4096 reuseport;
```

- **backlog=4096**: Kernel queue for pending connections (default: 511)
- **reuseport**: Distribute connections across workers (reduces lock contention)

#### Keepalive Settings

```nginx
keepalive_timeout 65;               # Client connection timeout
keepalive_requests 10000;           # Requests per connection (default: 100)
reset_timedout_connection on;       # Free memory from timed-out connections
```

### Rate Limiting

Rate limiting is configured for high-concurrency load testing scenarios:

```nginx
# Zone definition (10MB shared memory, ~160,000 IPs)
limit_req_zone $binary_remote_addr zone=api_limit:10m rate=3000r/s;
limit_conn_zone $binary_remote_addr zone=conn_limit:10m;

# Return 429 instead of 503 (semantically correct per RFC 6585)
limit_req_status 429;
limit_conn_status 429;
```

**Applied to API endpoints:**

```nginx
location ~ ^/(tools|servers|gateways|...)$ {
    limit_req zone=api_limit burst=3000 nodelay;
    limit_conn conn_limit 3000;
    # ...
}
```

**How it works:**

| Parameter | Value | Effect |
|-----------|-------|--------|
| `rate=3000r/s` | 3000 tokens/second | Sustained request rate |
| `burst=3000` | 3000 bucket size | Requests that can queue/proceed |
| `nodelay` | Immediate | Burst requests processed instantly |
| `limit_conn 3000` | 3000 connections | Max concurrent connections per IP |

**Effective limits:**
- Sustained: 3000 requests/second continuously
- Burst: Up to 3000 additional requests can proceed instantly
- Peak: 6000 requests in first second, then 3000/s sustained

**Excluded from rate limiting:**
- `/health` endpoint (for monitoring during load tests)

**Tuning for your workload:**

```nginx
# Lower limits for production (protect backend)
limit_req_zone $binary_remote_addr zone=api_limit:10m rate=100r/s;

location /api {
    limit_req zone=api_limit burst=50 nodelay;
    limit_conn conn_limit 100;
}
```

### Upstream Load Balancing

The upstream configuration is optimized for high-throughput scenarios:

```nginx
upstream gateway_backend {
    least_conn;                       # Route to backend with fewest connections

    server gateway:4444 max_fails=0;  # Disable failure tracking (always retry)

    keepalive 512;                    # Persistent connections per worker
    keepalive_requests 100000;        # Requests per keepalive connection
    keepalive_timeout 60s;            # Connection idle timeout
}
```

**Load balancing algorithms:**

| Algorithm | Use Case |
|-----------|----------|
| `least_conn` (default) | High-concurrency, uneven request duration |
| `round_robin` | Even request distribution |
| `ip_hash` | Session affinity (sticky sessions) |

**Keepalive pool sizing:**
- Each nginx worker maintains its own pool
- With 4 workers: 512 × 4 = 2048 reusable connections
- Remaining connections use short-lived TCP

**Upstream retry configuration:**

```nginx
proxy_next_upstream error timeout http_502 http_503 http_504;
proxy_next_upstream_tries 2;
proxy_next_upstream_timeout 10s;
```

### Proxy Buffer Tuning

Larger buffers reduce disk I/O for upstream responses:

```nginx
proxy_buffer_size 16k;              # First response buffer (headers)
proxy_buffers 8 32k;                # Number and size of buffers per connection
proxy_busy_buffers_size 64k;        # Max size while sending to client
proxy_temp_file_write_size 64k;     # Chunk size for temp files
```

### Open File Cache

Reduces file descriptor overhead for frequently accessed files:

```nginx
open_file_cache max=10000 inactive=60s;  # Cache up to 10,000 file descriptors
open_file_cache_valid 30s;               # Revalidate cached info every 30s
open_file_cache_min_uses 2;              # Cache after 2 accesses
open_file_cache_errors on;               # Cache lookup errors too
```

### Access Logging

**Default: Disabled for performance**

```nginx
# access_log /var/log/nginx/access.log main;  # Uncomment for debugging
access_log off;                               # Disabled for load testing
```

Access logging is a major I/O bottleneck under high load. Enable only for debugging:

```bash
# Edit nginx.conf, uncomment access_log line, then:
docker-compose restart nginx
```

The log format includes cache status and timing metrics:

```nginx
log_format main '$remote_addr - $remote_user [$time_local] "$request" '
                '$status $body_bytes_sent "$http_referer" '
                '"$http_user_agent" "$http_x_forwarded_for" '
                'cache_status=$upstream_cache_status '
                'rt=$request_time uct="$upstream_connect_time" '
                'uht="$upstream_header_time" urt="$upstream_response_time"';
```

### Cache Size Tuning

Edit `nginx/nginx.conf`:

```nginx
# Increase static cache to 5GB
proxy_cache_path /var/cache/nginx/static
                 levels=1:2
                 keys_zone=static_cache:100m
                 max_size=5g  # Changed from 1g
                 inactive=30d
                 use_temp_path=off;
```

### TTL Tuning

Edit cache valid directives:

```nginx
# Increase API cache TTL to 15 minutes
proxy_cache_valid 200 15m;  # Changed from 5m
```

## Monitoring

### Cache Statistics

```bash
# View cache size
docker-compose exec nginx du -sh /var/cache/nginx/*

# View cache entry counts
docker-compose exec nginx find /var/cache/nginx -type f | wc -l

# View nginx stats
curl http://localhost:8080/metrics  # If metrics enabled in gateway
```

### Access Logs

```bash
# Follow access logs with cache status
docker-compose logs -f nginx | grep cache_status

# Analyze cache hit rate
docker-compose exec nginx cat /var/log/nginx/access.log | \
  grep -oP 'cache_status=\K\w+' | sort | uniq -c
```

### Cache Headers

All responses include `X-Cache-Status` header:

- `HIT`: Served from cache
- `MISS`: Not in cache, fetched from backend
- `BYPASS`: Cache bypassed (mutation or excluded endpoint)
- `EXPIRED`: Cache expired, revalidating
- `STALE`: Serving stale content while updating
- `UPDATING`: Cache being updated in background
- `REVALIDATED`: Cache entry validated and still fresh

## Troubleshooting

### Cache Not Working

1. Check `X-Cache-Status` header:
   ```bash
   curl -I http://localhost:8080/openapi.json | grep X-Cache-Status
   ```

2. Verify cache directory permissions:
   ```bash
   docker-compose exec nginx ls -la /var/cache/nginx
   ```

3. Check nginx error logs:
   ```bash
   docker-compose logs nginx | grep error
   ```

### Low Cache Hit Rate

1. Verify request patterns:
   ```bash
   docker-compose exec nginx cat /var/log/nginx/access.log | \
     grep -oP 'cache_status=\K\w+' | sort | uniq -c
   ```

2. Check for cache-busting query parameters
3. Increase TTL values if appropriate

### High Memory Usage

1. Reduce cache zone sizes in `nginx.conf`
2. Reduce `max_size` parameters
3. Reduce `inactive` time to expire old entries faster

### Stale Content

Purge cache manually:

```bash
# Remove all cache
docker-compose exec nginx rm -rf /var/cache/nginx/*

# Restart nginx to clear in-memory state
docker-compose restart nginx
```

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐
│   Client        │
│  (Browser/CLI)  │
└────────┬────────┘
         │ http://localhost:8080
         ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Nginx Caching Proxy               │
│                                     │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Cache Zones                 │  │
│  │  • static_cache  (1GB)       │  │
│  │  • api_cache     (512MB)     │  │
│  │  • schema_cache  (256MB)     │  │
│  └──────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                     │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Cache Logic                 │  │
│  │  • Method-based bypass       │  │
│  │  • Pattern matching          │  │
│  │  • TTL enforcement           │  │
│  │  • Stale-while-revalidate    │  │
│  └──────────────────────────────┘  │
└────────┬────────────────────────────┘
         │ http://gateway:4444
         ▼
┌─────────────────┐
│  MCP Gateway    │
│  (FastAPI)      │
└─────────────────┘
```

## Security

### Headers

All responses include security headers:

- `X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN`
- `X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff`
- `X-XSS-Protection: 1; mode=block`
- `Referrer-Policy: strict-origin-when-cross-origin`

### Access Control

Default configuration allows all origins. To restrict:

```nginx
# Add to server block in nginx.conf
location / {
    # Restrict to specific IP ranges
    allow 10.0.0.0/8;
    allow 172.16.0.0/12;
    deny all;

    proxy_pass http://gateway_backend;
}
```

## Advanced Features

### Cache Purging (Optional)

Requires `nginx` with `ngx_cache_purge` module. Uncomment in `nginx.conf`:

```nginx
location ~ /purge(/.*) {
    allow 127.0.0.1;
    allow 172.16.0.0/12;  # Docker networks
    deny all;
    proxy_cache_purge static_cache $scheme$request_method$host$1;
}
```

Purge specific URL:

```bash
curl -X PURGE http://localhost:8080/purge/openapi.json
```

### Custom Cache Keys

Modify cache key construction in `nginx.conf`:

```nginx
# Include user in cache key for user-specific responses
proxy_cache_key "$scheme$request_method$host$request_uri$http_authorization";
```

### Conditional Caching

Add custom bypass logic:

```nginx
# Skip cache if specific header present
map $http_x_no_cache $skip_cache {
    default 0;
    "1" 1;
}

proxy_cache_bypass $skip_cache;
```

## Testing

### Manual Testing

```bash
# Test static asset caching
for i in {1..5}; do
  curl -I http://localhost:8080/static/style.css | grep X-Cache-Status
done

# Test API caching
for i in {1..5}; do
  curl -I http://localhost:8080/tools | grep X-Cache-Status
done

# Test cache bypass on mutations
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/tools -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"name":"test"}' -I | grep X-Cache-Status
```

### Load Testing

```bash
# Install hey (HTTP load generator)
# https://github.com/rakyll/hey

# Test without cache (direct to gateway)
hey -n 1000 -c 50 http://localhost:4444/openapi.json

# Test with cache (through nginx)
hey -n 1000 -c 50 http://localhost:8080/openapi.json

# Compare results
```

## Migration

### From Direct Gateway Access

1. Update client URLs from `:4444` to `:8080`
2. Start nginx service: `docker-compose up -d nginx`
3. Monitor logs: `docker-compose logs -f nginx`

### Gradual Rollout

Keep both ports exposed during transition:

- `:4444` - Direct gateway access (existing clients)
- `:8080` - Cached access (new clients)

Update clients incrementally to use `:8080`.

## Maintenance

### Regular Tasks

1. **Monitor cache size**: `docker-compose exec nginx du -sh /var/cache/nginx`
2. **Review hit rates**: Check `X-Cache-Status` in access logs
3. **Update TTLs**: Adjust based on content change frequency

### Backup

Cache is ephemeral by design. No backup needed.

To preserve cache across restarts, use named volume (already configured):

```yaml
volumes:
  - nginx_cache:/var/cache/nginx
```

## References

- [Nginx Caching Guide](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_proxy_module.html#proxy_cache)
- [Nginx Performance Tuning](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_core_module.html)
- [HTTP Caching Best Practices](https://web.dev/http-cache/)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

infra/nginx/README.md, after:

# Nginx Caching Proxy for ContextForge

High-performance reverse proxy with CDN-like caching capabilities for the ContextForge. Provides intelligent caching for static assets, API responses, and schema endpoints with minimal configuration.

## Features

- **Multi-tier caching strategy** with 3 dedicated cache zones
- **Intelligent cache bypass** for mutations (POST/PUT/PATCH/DELETE)
- **CDN-like performance** with stale-while-revalidate patterns
- **WebSocket/SSE support** with proper proxy configuration
- **Cache status headers** for debugging and monitoring
- **Persistent cache storage** using Docker volumes
- **Security headers** and best practices out of the box

## Quick Start

### Start with Docker Compose

```bash
# From repository root
docker-compose up -d nginx

# View logs
docker-compose logs -f nginx

# Access via caching proxy
curl -I http://localhost:8080/health
```

### Verify Caching

```bash
# First request (MISS)
curl -I http://localhost:8080/openapi.json | grep X-Cache-Status
# X-Cache-Status: MISS

# Second request (HIT)
curl -I http://localhost:8080/openapi.json | grep X-Cache-Status
# X-Cache-Status: HIT

# Check cache effectiveness
docker-compose exec nginx du -sh /var/cache/nginx/*
```

## Cache Zones

### 1. Static Assets Cache (`static_cache`)

**Purpose**: Cache CSS, JS, images, fonts
**Size**: 1GB
**TTL**: 30 days
**Patterns**: `*.css`, `*.js`, `*.jpg`, `*.png`, `*.gif`, `*.ico`, `*.svg`, `*.woff`, `*.woff2`, `*.ttf`, `*.eot`, `*.otf`, `*.webp`, `*.avif`

**Benefits**:
- 95%+ cache hit rate for static assets
- 50-90% reduction in backend load
- Near-instant response times (<5ms)

### 2. API Response Cache (`api_cache`)

**Purpose**: Cache read-only API responses
**Size**: 512MB
**TTL**: 5 minutes
**Endpoints**: `/tools`, `/servers`, `/gateways`, `/resources`, `/prompts`, `/tags`, `/a2a`, `/health`, `/version`, `/metrics`

**Benefits**:
- 40-70% reduction in database queries
- 30-50% improvement in API response times
- Reduced database connection pressure

### 3. Schema Cache (`schema_cache`)

**Purpose**: Cache OpenAPI specs and documentation
**Size**: 256MB
**TTL**: 24 hours
**Endpoints**: `/openapi.json`, `/docs`, `/redoc`

**Benefits**:
- 99%+ cache hit rate for schema endpoints
- 80-95% reduction in schema generation overhead
- Sub-millisecond response times

## Cache Bypass Rules

Cache is automatically bypassed for:

- **Mutation methods**: POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE
- **WebSocket connections**: `/servers/*/ws`
- **SSE streams**: `/servers/*/sse`
- **JSON-RPC endpoint**: `/` (root)

## Performance Characteristics

### Expected Cache Hit Rates

| Endpoint Type | Expected Hit Rate | TTL |
|--------------|------------------|-----|
| Static assets | 95-99% | 30 days |
| OpenAPI schema | 99%+ | 24 hours |
| API responses | 40-70% | 5 minutes |
| Admin UI | 30-50% | 1 minute |

### Performance Improvements

| Metric | Without Cache | With Cache | Improvement |
|--------|--------------|-----------|-------------|
| Static asset response time | 20-50ms | 1-5ms | **80-90% faster** |
| OpenAPI schema response time | 50-200ms | 1-10ms | **90-95% faster** |
| API list endpoints | 30-100ms | 5-20ms | **60-80% faster** |
| Backend load (requests/sec) | 1000 | 200-400 | **60-80% reduction** |

### Resource Usage

- **Memory**: ~200-300MB for cache zones + OS overhead
- **Disk**: Up to 1.75GB (1GB + 512MB + 256MB)
- **CPU**: <5% under normal load, <15% during cache invalidation

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

No environment variables required. All configuration is in `nginx.conf`.

### High-Concurrency Tuning

The nginx configuration is optimized for 3000+ concurrent users (e.g., locust load testing). Key settings:

#### Worker Process Settings

```nginx
# nginx.conf - Main context
worker_processes auto;              # One worker per CPU core
worker_rlimit_nofile 65535;         # Max open files per worker
worker_cpu_affinity auto;           # Bind workers to CPUs

events {
    worker_connections 8192;        # Connections per worker (default: 1024)
    use epoll;                      # Linux-optimized event model
    multi_accept on;                # Accept multiple connections at once
    accept_mutex off;               # Disable mutex for better parallelism
}
```

#### Listen Socket Tuning

```nginx
# Server block
listen 80 backlog=4096 reuseport;
```

- **backlog=4096**: Kernel queue for pending connections (default: 511)
- **reuseport**: Distribute connections across workers (reduces lock contention)

#### Keepalive Settings

```nginx
keepalive_timeout 65;               # Client connection timeout
keepalive_requests 10000;           # Requests per connection (default: 100)
reset_timedout_connection on;       # Free memory from timed-out connections
```

### Rate Limiting

Rate limiting is configured for high-concurrency load testing scenarios:

```nginx
# Zone definition (10MB shared memory, ~160,000 IPs)
limit_req_zone $binary_remote_addr zone=api_limit:10m rate=3000r/s;
limit_conn_zone $binary_remote_addr zone=conn_limit:10m;

# Return 429 instead of 503 (semantically correct per RFC 6585)
limit_req_status 429;
limit_conn_status 429;
```

**Applied to API endpoints:**

```nginx
location ~ ^/(tools|servers|gateways|...)$ {
    limit_req zone=api_limit burst=3000 nodelay;
    limit_conn conn_limit 3000;
    # ...
}
```

**How it works:**

| Parameter | Value | Effect |
|-----------|-------|--------|
| `rate=3000r/s` | 3000 tokens/second | Sustained request rate |
| `burst=3000` | 3000 bucket size | Requests that can queue/proceed |
| `nodelay` | Immediate | Burst requests processed instantly |
| `limit_conn 3000` | 3000 connections | Max concurrent connections per IP |

**Effective limits:**
- Sustained: 3000 requests/second continuously
- Burst: Up to 3000 additional requests can proceed instantly
- Peak: 6000 requests in first second, then 3000/s sustained

**Excluded from rate limiting:**
- `/health` endpoint (for monitoring during load tests)

**Tuning for your workload:**

```nginx
# Lower limits for production (protect backend)
limit_req_zone $binary_remote_addr zone=api_limit:10m rate=100r/s;

location /api {
    limit_req zone=api_limit burst=50 nodelay;
    limit_conn conn_limit 100;
}
```

### Upstream Load Balancing

The upstream configuration is optimized for high-throughput scenarios:

```nginx
upstream gateway_backend {
    least_conn;                       # Route to backend with fewest connections

    server gateway:4444 max_fails=0;  # Disable failure tracking (always retry)

    keepalive 512;                    # Persistent connections per worker
    keepalive_requests 100000;        # Requests per keepalive connection
    keepalive_timeout 60s;            # Connection idle timeout
}
```

**Load balancing algorithms:**

| Algorithm | Use Case |
|-----------|----------|
| `least_conn` (default) | High-concurrency, uneven request duration |
| `round_robin` | Even request distribution |
| `ip_hash` | Session affinity (sticky sessions) |

**Keepalive pool sizing:**
- Each nginx worker maintains its own pool
- With 4 workers: 512 × 4 = 2048 reusable connections
- Remaining connections use short-lived TCP

**Upstream retry configuration:**

```nginx
proxy_next_upstream error timeout http_502 http_503 http_504;
proxy_next_upstream_tries 2;
proxy_next_upstream_timeout 10s;
```

### Proxy Buffer Tuning

Larger buffers reduce disk I/O for upstream responses:

```nginx
proxy_buffer_size 16k;              # First response buffer (headers)
proxy_buffers 8 32k;                # Number and size of buffers per connection
proxy_busy_buffers_size 64k;        # Max size while sending to client
proxy_temp_file_write_size 64k;     # Chunk size for temp files
```

### Open File Cache

Reduces file descriptor overhead for frequently accessed files:

```nginx
open_file_cache max=10000 inactive=60s;  # Cache up to 10,000 file descriptors
open_file_cache_valid 30s;               # Revalidate cached info every 30s
open_file_cache_min_uses 2;              # Cache after 2 accesses
open_file_cache_errors on;               # Cache lookup errors too
```

### Access Logging

**Default: Disabled for performance**

```nginx
# access_log /var/log/nginx/access.log main;  # Uncomment for debugging
access_log off;                               # Disabled for load testing
```

Access logging is a major I/O bottleneck under high load. Enable only for debugging:

```bash
# Edit nginx.conf, uncomment access_log line, then:
docker-compose restart nginx
```

The log format includes cache status and timing metrics:

```nginx
log_format main '$remote_addr - $remote_user [$time_local] "$request" '
                '$status $body_bytes_sent "$http_referer" '
                '"$http_user_agent" "$http_x_forwarded_for" '
                'cache_status=$upstream_cache_status '
                'rt=$request_time uct="$upstream_connect_time" '
                'uht="$upstream_header_time" urt="$upstream_response_time"';
```

### Cache Size Tuning

Edit `nginx/nginx.conf`:

```nginx
# Increase static cache to 5GB
proxy_cache_path /var/cache/nginx/static
                 levels=1:2
                 keys_zone=static_cache:100m
                 max_size=5g  # Changed from 1g
                 inactive=30d
                 use_temp_path=off;
```

### TTL Tuning

Edit cache valid directives:

```nginx
# Increase API cache TTL to 15 minutes
proxy_cache_valid 200 15m;  # Changed from 5m
```

## Monitoring

### Cache Statistics

```bash
# View cache size
docker-compose exec nginx du -sh /var/cache/nginx/*

# View cache entry counts
docker-compose exec nginx find /var/cache/nginx -type f | wc -l

# View nginx stats
curl http://localhost:8080/metrics  # If metrics enabled in gateway
```

### Access Logs

```bash
# Follow access logs with cache status
docker-compose logs -f nginx | grep cache_status

# Analyze cache hit rate
docker-compose exec nginx cat /var/log/nginx/access.log | \
  grep -oP 'cache_status=\K\w+' | sort | uniq -c
```

### Cache Headers

All responses include `X-Cache-Status` header:

- `HIT`: Served from cache
- `MISS`: Not in cache, fetched from backend
- `BYPASS`: Cache bypassed (mutation or excluded endpoint)
- `EXPIRED`: Cache expired, revalidating
- `STALE`: Serving stale content while updating
- `UPDATING`: Cache being updated in background
- `REVALIDATED`: Cache entry validated and still fresh

## Troubleshooting

### Cache Not Working

1. Check `X-Cache-Status` header:
   ```bash
   curl -I http://localhost:8080/openapi.json | grep X-Cache-Status
   ```

2. Verify cache directory permissions:
   ```bash
   docker-compose exec nginx ls -la /var/cache/nginx
   ```

3. Check nginx error logs:
   ```bash
   docker-compose logs nginx | grep error
   ```

### Low Cache Hit Rate

1. Verify request patterns:
   ```bash
   docker-compose exec nginx cat /var/log/nginx/access.log | \
     grep -oP 'cache_status=\K\w+' | sort | uniq -c
   ```

2. Check for cache-busting query parameters
3. Increase TTL values if appropriate

### High Memory Usage

1. Reduce cache zone sizes in `nginx.conf`
2. Reduce `max_size` parameters
3. Reduce `inactive` time to expire old entries faster

### Stale Content

Purge cache manually:

```bash
# Remove all cache
docker-compose exec nginx rm -rf /var/cache/nginx/*

# Restart nginx to clear in-memory state
docker-compose restart nginx
```

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐
│   Client        │
│  (Browser/CLI)  │
└────────┬────────┘
         │ http://localhost:8080
         ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Nginx Caching Proxy               │
│                                     │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Cache Zones                 │  │
│  │  • static_cache  (1GB)       │  │
│  │  • api_cache     (512MB)     │  │
│  │  • schema_cache  (256MB)     │  │
│  └──────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                     │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Cache Logic                 │  │
│  │  • Method-based bypass       │  │
│  │  • Pattern matching          │  │
│  │  • TTL enforcement           │  │
│  │  • Stale-while-revalidate    │  │
│  └──────────────────────────────┘  │
└────────┬────────────────────────────┘
         │ http://gateway:4444
         ▼
┌─────────────────┐
│  ContextForge    │
│  (FastAPI)      │
└─────────────────┘
```

## Security

### Headers

All responses include security headers:

- `X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN`
- `X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff`
- `X-XSS-Protection: 1; mode=block`
- `Referrer-Policy: strict-origin-when-cross-origin`

### Access Control

Default configuration allows all origins. To restrict:

```nginx
# Add to server block in nginx.conf
location / {
    # Restrict to specific IP ranges
    allow 10.0.0.0/8;
    allow 172.16.0.0/12;
    deny all;

    proxy_pass http://gateway_backend;
}
```

## Advanced Features

### Cache Purging (Optional)

Requires `nginx` with `ngx_cache_purge` module. Uncomment in `nginx.conf`:

```nginx
location ~ /purge(/.*) {
    allow 127.0.0.1;
    allow 172.16.0.0/12;  # Docker networks
    deny all;
    proxy_cache_purge static_cache $scheme$request_method$host$1;
}
```

Purge specific URL:

```bash
curl -X PURGE http://localhost:8080/purge/openapi.json
```

### Custom Cache Keys

Modify cache key construction in `nginx.conf`:

```nginx
# Include user in cache key for user-specific responses
proxy_cache_key "$scheme$request_method$host$request_uri$http_authorization";
```

### Conditional Caching

Add custom bypass logic:

```nginx
# Skip cache if specific header present
map $http_x_no_cache $skip_cache {
    default 0;
    "1" 1;
}

proxy_cache_bypass $skip_cache;
```

## Testing

### Manual Testing

```bash
# Test static asset caching
for i in {1..5}; do
  curl -I http://localhost:8080/static/style.css | grep X-Cache-Status
done

# Test API caching
for i in {1..5}; do
  curl -I http://localhost:8080/tools | grep X-Cache-Status
done

# Test cache bypass on mutations
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/tools -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"name":"test"}' -I | grep X-Cache-Status
```

### Load Testing

```bash
# Install hey (HTTP load generator)
# https://github.com/rakyll/hey

# Test without cache (direct to gateway)
hey -n 1000 -c 50 http://localhost:4444/openapi.json

# Test with cache (through nginx)
hey -n 1000 -c 50 http://localhost:8080/openapi.json

# Compare results
```

## Migration

### From Direct Gateway Access

1. Update client URLs from `:4444` to `:8080`
2. Start nginx service: `docker-compose up -d nginx`
3. Monitor logs: `docker-compose logs -f nginx`

### Gradual Rollout

Keep both ports exposed during transition:

- `:4444` - Direct gateway access (existing clients)
- `:8080` - Cached access (new clients)

Update clients incrementally to use `:8080`.

## Maintenance

### Regular Tasks

1. **Monitor cache size**: `docker-compose exec nginx du -sh /var/cache/nginx`
2. **Review hit rates**: Check `X-Cache-Status` in access logs
3. **Update TTLs**: Adjust based on content change frequency

### Backup

Cache is ephemeral by design. No backup needed.

To preserve cache across restarts, use named volume (already configured):

```yaml
volumes:
  - nginx_cache:/var/cache/nginx
```

## References

- [Nginx Caching Guide](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_proxy_module.html#proxy_cache)
- [Nginx Performance Tuning](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_core_module.html)
- [HTTP Caching Best Practices](https://web.dev/http-cache/)
