docs/docs/using/servers/python/python-sandbox-server.md, before:

# Python Sandbox Server

## Overview

The Python Sandbox MCP Server provides a highly secure environment for executing Python code with multiple layers of protection. It combines RestrictedPython for AST-level code transformation with optional gVisor container isolation for maximum security. The server includes resource controls, tiered security capabilities, and comprehensive monitoring. It's powered by FastMCP for enhanced type safety and automatic validation.

### Key Features

- **Multi-Layer Security**: RestrictedPython + tiered capability model
- **Resource Controls**: Configurable memory, CPU, and execution time limits
- **Safe Execution Environment**: Restricted builtins and namespace isolation
- **Tiered Security Model**: Basic, Data Science, Network, and Filesystem capabilities
- **Code Validation**: Pre-execution code analysis and validation
- **Security Monitoring**: Tracks and reports security events and blocked operations
- **Rich Module Library**: 40+ safe stdlib modules, optional data science and network support

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Install in development mode with sandbox dependencies
make dev-install

# Or install normally
make install
```

### Configuration

Create a `.env` file (see `.env.example`) to configure the sandbox:

```bash
# Copy example configuration
cp .env.example .env

# Edit as needed
vi .env
```

### Running the Server

```bash
# Stdio mode (for Claude Desktop, IDEs)
make dev

# HTTP mode (via MCP Gateway)
make serve-http
```

## Available Tools

### execute_code
Execute Python code in secure sandbox.

**Parameters:**

- `code` (required): Python code to execute
- `timeout`: Execution timeout in seconds (default: 30, max: 300)
- `capture_output`: Capture stdout/stderr (default: true)
- `allowed_imports`: List of allowed modules
- `use_container`: Use container isolation (default: false)
- `memory_limit`: Memory limit for container mode

### validate_code
Validate code without execution.

**Parameters:**

- `code` (required): Python code to validate

### get_sandbox_info
Get sandbox capabilities and configuration.

**Returns:**

- Available capabilities and security profiles
- Resource limits and configurations
- Supported modules and libraries

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

#### Core Settings
- `SANDBOX_TIMEOUT` - Execution timeout in seconds (default: 30)
- `SANDBOX_MAX_OUTPUT_SIZE` - Maximum output size in bytes (default: 1MB)

#### Security Capabilities
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_NETWORK` - Enable network modules like httpx, requests (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM` - Enable filesystem modules like pathlib, tempfile (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_DATA_SCIENCE` - Enable numpy, pandas, scipy, matplotlib, etc. (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_ALLOWED_IMPORTS` - Override with custom comma-separated module list (optional)

#### Container Mode (Optional)
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_CONTAINER_MODE` - Enable container execution (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_CONTAINER_IMAGE` - Container image name (default: python-sandbox:latest)
- `SANDBOX_DEFAULT_MEMORY_LIMIT` - Default memory limit (default: 128m)

### MCP Client Configuration

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "python-sandbox": {
      "command": "python",
      "args": ["-m", "python_sandbox_server.server_fastmcp"],
      "cwd": "/path/to/python_sandbox_server"
    }
  }
}
```

## Examples

### Basic Code Execution

```json
{
  "code": "result = 2 + 2\nprint(f'The answer is: {result}')",
  "timeout": 10,
  "capture_output": true
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "success": true,
  "execution_id": "uuid-here",
  "result": 4,
  "stdout": "The answer is: 4\n",
  "stderr": "",
  "execution_time": 0.001,
  "variables": ["result"]
}
```

### Data Analysis Example

```json
{
  "code": "import math\ndata = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]\nresult = sum(data) / len(data)\nprint(f'Average: {result}')",
  "allowed_imports": ["math"],
  "timeout": 15
}
```

### Container-Based Execution

```json
{
  "code": "import numpy as np\ndata = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])\nresult = np.mean(data)",
  "use_container": true,
  "memory_limit": "256m",
  "timeout": 30
}
```

### Code Validation

```json
{
  "code": "import os\nos.system('rm -rf /')"
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "validation": {
    "valid": false,
    "errors": ["Line 1: Import 'os' is not allowed"],
    "message": "Code contains restricted operations"
  },
  "analysis": {
    "line_count": 2,
    "character_count": 25,
    "estimated_complexity": "low"
  },
  "recommendations": [
    "Some operations may be restricted in sandbox environment"
  ]
}
```

### Get Sandbox Capabilities

```json
{}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "success": true,
  "security_profiles": {
    "basic": {
      "enabled": true,
      "modules": ["math", "random", "datetime", "json", "base64"]
    },
    "data_science": {
      "enabled": false,
      "modules": ["numpy", "pandas", "scipy", "matplotlib"]
    },
    "network": {
      "enabled": false,
      "modules": ["httpx", "requests", "urllib"]
    },
    "filesystem": {
      "enabled": false,
      "modules": ["pathlib", "tempfile", "shutil"]
    }
  },
  "resource_limits": {
    "timeout": 30,
    "max_output_size": 1048576,
    "memory_limit": "128m"
  },
  "container_mode": {
    "available": true,
    "enabled": false
  }
}
```

## Integration

### With MCP Gateway

```bash
# Start the Python sandbox server via HTTP
make serve-http

# Register with MCP Gateway
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/gateways \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "python-sandbox",
    "url": "http://localhost:9000",
    "description": "Secure Python code execution sandbox"
  }'
```

### Programmatic Usage

```python
import asyncio
from mcp import ClientSession, StdioServerParameters
from mcp.client.stdio import stdio_client

async def execute_safe_code():
    server_params = StdioServerParameters(
        command="python",
        args=["-m", "python_sandbox_server.server_fastmcp"]
    )

    async with stdio_client(server_params) as (read, write):
        async with ClientSession(read, write) as session:
            await session.initialize()

            # Execute safe mathematical computation
            result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
                "code": """
def fibonacci(n):
    if n <= 1:
        return n
    return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)

result = [fibonacci(i) for i in range(10)]
print("Fibonacci sequence:", result)
                """
            })

            print(result.content[0].text)

asyncio.run(execute_safe_code())
```

## Security Architecture

### Layer 1: RestrictedPython
- **AST Transformation**: Modifies code at the Abstract Syntax Tree level
- **Safe Builtins**: Only allows approved built-in functions
- **Import Restrictions**: Controls which modules can be imported
- **Namespace Isolation**: Prevents access to dangerous globals

### Layer 2: Container Isolation (Optional)
- **gVisor Runtime**: Application kernel for additional isolation
- **Resource Limits**: Memory, CPU, and network restrictions
- **Read-only Filesystem**: Prevents file system modifications
- **No Network Access**: Blocks all network operations
- **Non-root Execution**: Runs with minimal privileges

### Layer 3: Host-Level Controls
- **Execution Timeouts**: Hard limits on execution time
- **Output Size Limits**: Prevents excessive output generation
- **Process Monitoring**: Tracks resource usage and execution state

## Security Profiles

### Basic Profile (Default)
Safe standard library modules only:

- **Math & Random**: math, random, statistics, decimal, fractions
- **Data Structures**: collections, itertools, functools, heapq, bisect
- **Text Processing**: string, textwrap, re, difflib, unicodedata
- **Encoding**: base64, binascii, hashlib, hmac, secrets
- **Parsing**: json, csv, html.parser, xml.etree, urllib.parse
- **Utilities**: datetime, uuid, calendar, dataclasses, enum, typing

### Data Science Profile
Enable with `SANDBOX_ENABLE_DATA_SCIENCE=true`:

- numpy, pandas, scipy, matplotlib
- seaborn, sklearn, statsmodels
- plotly, sympy

### Network Profile
Enable with `SANDBOX_ENABLE_NETWORK=true`:

- httpx, requests, urllib.request
- aiohttp, websocket
- email, smtplib, ftplib

### Filesystem Profile
Enable with `SANDBOX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM=true`:

- pathlib, os.path, tempfile
- shutil, glob
- zipfile, tarfile

## Container Setup (Optional)

For maximum security with container isolation:

```bash
# Build the sandbox container
make build-sandbox

# Test the container
make test-sandbox
```

### gVisor Installation (Recommended)

For additional security, install gVisor runtime:

```bash
# Install gVisor (Ubuntu/Debian)
curl -fsSL https://gvisor.dev/archive.key | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/gvisor-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [arch=$(dpkg --print-architecture) signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/gvisor-archive-keyring.gpg] https://storage.googleapis.com/gvisor/releases release main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/gvisor.list > /dev/null
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install -y runsc

# Configure Docker to use gVisor
sudo systemctl restart docker
```

## Use Cases

### Educational/Learning
```python
# Teach Python concepts safely
code = """
def fibonacci(n):
    if n <= 1:
        return n
    return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)

result = [fibonacci(i) for i in range(10)]
print("Fibonacci sequence:", result)
"""
```

### Data Analysis Prototyping
```python
# Quick data analysis
code = """
import statistics
data = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
mean = statistics.mean(data)
median = statistics.median(data)
stdev = statistics.stdev(data)

result = {
    'mean': mean,
    'median': median,
    'std_dev': stdev
}
print(f"Statistics: {result}")
"""
```

### Algorithm Testing
```python
# Test sorting algorithms
code = """
def bubble_sort(arr):
    n = len(arr)
    for i in range(n):
        for j in range(0, n-i-1):
            if arr[j] > arr[j+1]:
                arr[j], arr[j+1] = arr[j+1], arr[j]
    return arr

test_data = [64, 34, 25, 12, 22, 11, 90]
result = bubble_sort(test_data.copy())
print(f"Sorted: {result}")
"""
```

### Mathematical Computations
```python
# Complex mathematical operations
code = """
import math

def calculate_pi_leibniz(terms):
    pi_approx = 0
    for i in range(terms):
        pi_approx += ((-1) ** i) / (2 * i + 1)
    return pi_approx * 4

result = calculate_pi_leibniz(1000)
print(f"Pi approximation: {result}")
print(f"Difference from math.pi: {abs(result - math.pi)}")
"""
```

## Advanced Features

### Code Analysis and Validation

```python
# Validate code before execution
validation_result = await session.call_tool("validate_code", {
    "code": "import os; os.system('ls')"
})

if validation_result["validation"]["valid"]:
    # Execute if valid
    execution_result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
        "code": "print('Safe code execution')"
    })
```

### Batch Code Execution

```python
# Execute multiple code snippets
code_snippets = [
    "print('Hello, World!')",
    "result = sum(range(10))",
    "import math; print(math.pi)"
]

for code in code_snippets:
    result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
        "code": code,
        "timeout": 5
    })
    print(f"Result: {result}")
```

### Container Mode with Custom Limits

```python
# Execute with specific resource constraints
result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
    "code": "import numpy as np; data = np.random.rand(1000, 1000)",
    "use_container": True,
    "memory_limit": "512m",
    "timeout": 60
})
```

## Error Handling

The server handles various error conditions gracefully:

- **Syntax Errors**: Returns detailed syntax error information
- **Runtime Errors**: Captures and returns exception details
- **Timeout Errors**: Handles execution timeouts cleanly
- **Resource Errors**: Manages out-of-memory and resource exhaustion
- **Security Violations**: Blocks and reports dangerous operations

## Monitoring and Logging

- **Execution Tracking**: Each execution gets a unique ID
- **Performance Metrics**: Execution time and resource usage
- **Security Events**: Logs security violations and blocked operations
- **Error Analytics**: Detailed error reporting and categorization

## Deployment Recommendations

### Production Deployment
1. **Container Infrastructure**: Deploy with container orchestration (Kubernetes, Docker Swarm)
2. **Resource Limits**: Set strict CPU and memory limits
3. **Network Policies**: Restrict network access
4. **Monitoring**: Implement comprehensive logging and alerting
5. **Updates**: Regularly update dependencies and container images

### Security Hardening
1. **Use gVisor**: Enable gVisor runtime for container execution
2. **Read-only Filesystem**: Mount filesystems as read-only where possible
3. **SELinux/AppArmor**: Enable additional MAC controls
4. **Audit Logging**: Log all code execution attempts
5. **Rate Limiting**: Implement rate limiting for execution requests

## Limitations

- **No Persistent State**: Each execution is isolated
- **Limited I/O**: File system access is heavily restricted
- **Network Restrictions**: Network access is disabled by default
- **Resource Bounds**: Strict limits on memory and execution time
- **Module Restrictions**: Only safe modules are allowed

## Best Practices

1. **Always Validate**: Use `validate_code` before `execute_code`
2. **Set Appropriate Timeouts**: Balance functionality with security
3. **Use Container Mode**: For untrusted code, use container execution
4. **Monitor Resource Usage**: Track execution metrics
5. **Regular Updates**: Keep RestrictedPython and containers updated
6. **Audit Logs**: Review execution logs regularly for suspicious activity

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/servers/python/python-sandbox-server.md, after:

# Python Sandbox Server

## Overview

The Python Sandbox MCP Server provides a highly secure environment for executing Python code with multiple layers of protection. It combines RestrictedPython for AST-level code transformation with optional gVisor container isolation for maximum security. The server includes resource controls, tiered security capabilities, and comprehensive monitoring. It's powered by FastMCP for enhanced type safety and automatic validation.

### Key Features

- **Multi-Layer Security**: RestrictedPython + tiered capability model
- **Resource Controls**: Configurable memory, CPU, and execution time limits
- **Safe Execution Environment**: Restricted builtins and namespace isolation
- **Tiered Security Model**: Basic, Data Science, Network, and Filesystem capabilities
- **Code Validation**: Pre-execution code analysis and validation
- **Security Monitoring**: Tracks and reports security events and blocked operations
- **Rich Module Library**: 40+ safe stdlib modules, optional data science and network support

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Install in development mode with sandbox dependencies
make dev-install

# Or install normally
make install
```

### Configuration

Create a `.env` file (see `.env.example`) to configure the sandbox:

```bash
# Copy example configuration
cp .env.example .env

# Edit as needed
vi .env
```

### Running the Server

```bash
# Stdio mode (for Claude Desktop, IDEs)
make dev

# HTTP mode (via ContextForge)
make serve-http
```

## Available Tools

### execute_code
Execute Python code in secure sandbox.

**Parameters:**

- `code` (required): Python code to execute
- `timeout`: Execution timeout in seconds (default: 30, max: 300)
- `capture_output`: Capture stdout/stderr (default: true)
- `allowed_imports`: List of allowed modules
- `use_container`: Use container isolation (default: false)
- `memory_limit`: Memory limit for container mode

### validate_code
Validate code without execution.

**Parameters:**

- `code` (required): Python code to validate

### get_sandbox_info
Get sandbox capabilities and configuration.

**Returns:**

- Available capabilities and security profiles
- Resource limits and configurations
- Supported modules and libraries

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

#### Core Settings
- `SANDBOX_TIMEOUT` - Execution timeout in seconds (default: 30)
- `SANDBOX_MAX_OUTPUT_SIZE` - Maximum output size in bytes (default: 1MB)

#### Security Capabilities
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_NETWORK` - Enable network modules like httpx, requests (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM` - Enable filesystem modules like pathlib, tempfile (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_DATA_SCIENCE` - Enable numpy, pandas, scipy, matplotlib, etc. (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_ALLOWED_IMPORTS` - Override with custom comma-separated module list (optional)

#### Container Mode (Optional)
- `SANDBOX_ENABLE_CONTAINER_MODE` - Enable container execution (default: false)
- `SANDBOX_CONTAINER_IMAGE` - Container image name (default: python-sandbox:latest)
- `SANDBOX_DEFAULT_MEMORY_LIMIT` - Default memory limit (default: 128m)

### MCP Client Configuration

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "python-sandbox": {
      "command": "python",
      "args": ["-m", "python_sandbox_server.server_fastmcp"],
      "cwd": "/path/to/python_sandbox_server"
    }
  }
}
```

## Examples

### Basic Code Execution

```json
{
  "code": "result = 2 + 2\nprint(f'The answer is: {result}')",
  "timeout": 10,
  "capture_output": true
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "success": true,
  "execution_id": "uuid-here",
  "result": 4,
  "stdout": "The answer is: 4\n",
  "stderr": "",
  "execution_time": 0.001,
  "variables": ["result"]
}
```

### Data Analysis Example

```json
{
  "code": "import math\ndata = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]\nresult = sum(data) / len(data)\nprint(f'Average: {result}')",
  "allowed_imports": ["math"],
  "timeout": 15
}
```

### Container-Based Execution

```json
{
  "code": "import numpy as np\ndata = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])\nresult = np.mean(data)",
  "use_container": true,
  "memory_limit": "256m",
  "timeout": 30
}
```

### Code Validation

```json
{
  "code": "import os\nos.system('rm -rf /')"
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "validation": {
    "valid": false,
    "errors": ["Line 1: Import 'os' is not allowed"],
    "message": "Code contains restricted operations"
  },
  "analysis": {
    "line_count": 2,
    "character_count": 25,
    "estimated_complexity": "low"
  },
  "recommendations": [
    "Some operations may be restricted in sandbox environment"
  ]
}
```

### Get Sandbox Capabilities

```json
{}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "success": true,
  "security_profiles": {
    "basic": {
      "enabled": true,
      "modules": ["math", "random", "datetime", "json", "base64"]
    },
    "data_science": {
      "enabled": false,
      "modules": ["numpy", "pandas", "scipy", "matplotlib"]
    },
    "network": {
      "enabled": false,
      "modules": ["httpx", "requests", "urllib"]
    },
    "filesystem": {
      "enabled": false,
      "modules": ["pathlib", "tempfile", "shutil"]
    }
  },
  "resource_limits": {
    "timeout": 30,
    "max_output_size": 1048576,
    "memory_limit": "128m"
  },
  "container_mode": {
    "available": true,
    "enabled": false
  }
}
```

## Integration

### With ContextForge

```bash
# Start the Python sandbox server via HTTP
make serve-http

# Register with ContextForge
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/gateways \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "python-sandbox",
    "url": "http://localhost:9000",
    "description": "Secure Python code execution sandbox"
  }'
```

### Programmatic Usage

```python
import asyncio
from mcp import ClientSession, StdioServerParameters
from mcp.client.stdio import stdio_client

async def execute_safe_code():
    server_params = StdioServerParameters(
        command="python",
        args=["-m", "python_sandbox_server.server_fastmcp"]
    )

    async with stdio_client(server_params) as (read, write):
        async with ClientSession(read, write) as session:
            await session.initialize()

            # Execute safe mathematical computation
            result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
                "code": """
def fibonacci(n):
    if n <= 1:
        return n
    return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)

result = [fibonacci(i) for i in range(10)]
print("Fibonacci sequence:", result)
                """
            })

            print(result.content[0].text)

asyncio.run(execute_safe_code())
```

## Security Architecture

### Layer 1: RestrictedPython
- **AST Transformation**: Modifies code at the Abstract Syntax Tree level
- **Safe Builtins**: Only allows approved built-in functions
- **Import Restrictions**: Controls which modules can be imported
- **Namespace Isolation**: Prevents access to dangerous globals

### Layer 2: Container Isolation (Optional)
- **gVisor Runtime**: Application kernel for additional isolation
- **Resource Limits**: Memory, CPU, and network restrictions
- **Read-only Filesystem**: Prevents file system modifications
- **No Network Access**: Blocks all network operations
- **Non-root Execution**: Runs with minimal privileges

### Layer 3: Host-Level Controls
- **Execution Timeouts**: Hard limits on execution time
- **Output Size Limits**: Prevents excessive output generation
- **Process Monitoring**: Tracks resource usage and execution state

## Security Profiles

### Basic Profile (Default)
Safe standard library modules only:

- **Math & Random**: math, random, statistics, decimal, fractions
- **Data Structures**: collections, itertools, functools, heapq, bisect
- **Text Processing**: string, textwrap, re, difflib, unicodedata
- **Encoding**: base64, binascii, hashlib, hmac, secrets
- **Parsing**: json, csv, html.parser, xml.etree, urllib.parse
- **Utilities**: datetime, uuid, calendar, dataclasses, enum, typing

### Data Science Profile
Enable with `SANDBOX_ENABLE_DATA_SCIENCE=true`:

- numpy, pandas, scipy, matplotlib
- seaborn, sklearn, statsmodels
- plotly, sympy

### Network Profile
Enable with `SANDBOX_ENABLE_NETWORK=true`:

- httpx, requests, urllib.request
- aiohttp, websocket
- email, smtplib, ftplib

### Filesystem Profile
Enable with `SANDBOX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM=true`:

- pathlib, os.path, tempfile
- shutil, glob
- zipfile, tarfile

## Container Setup (Optional)

For maximum security with container isolation:

```bash
# Build the sandbox container
make build-sandbox

# Test the container
make test-sandbox
```

### gVisor Installation (Recommended)

For additional security, install gVisor runtime:

```bash
# Install gVisor (Ubuntu/Debian)
curl -fsSL https://gvisor.dev/archive.key | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/gvisor-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [arch=$(dpkg --print-architecture) signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/gvisor-archive-keyring.gpg] https://storage.googleapis.com/gvisor/releases release main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/gvisor.list > /dev/null
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install -y runsc

# Configure Docker to use gVisor
sudo systemctl restart docker
```

## Use Cases

### Educational/Learning
```python
# Teach Python concepts safely
code = """
def fibonacci(n):
    if n <= 1:
        return n
    return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)

result = [fibonacci(i) for i in range(10)]
print("Fibonacci sequence:", result)
"""
```

### Data Analysis Prototyping
```python
# Quick data analysis
code = """
import statistics
data = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
mean = statistics.mean(data)
median = statistics.median(data)
stdev = statistics.stdev(data)

result = {
    'mean': mean,
    'median': median,
    'std_dev': stdev
}
print(f"Statistics: {result}")
"""
```

### Algorithm Testing
```python
# Test sorting algorithms
code = """
def bubble_sort(arr):
    n = len(arr)
    for i in range(n):
        for j in range(0, n-i-1):
            if arr[j] > arr[j+1]:
                arr[j], arr[j+1] = arr[j+1], arr[j]
    return arr

test_data = [64, 34, 25, 12, 22, 11, 90]
result = bubble_sort(test_data.copy())
print(f"Sorted: {result}")
"""
```

### Mathematical Computations
```python
# Complex mathematical operations
code = """
import math

def calculate_pi_leibniz(terms):
    pi_approx = 0
    for i in range(terms):
        pi_approx += ((-1) ** i) / (2 * i + 1)
    return pi_approx * 4

result = calculate_pi_leibniz(1000)
print(f"Pi approximation: {result}")
print(f"Difference from math.pi: {abs(result - math.pi)}")
"""
```

## Advanced Features

### Code Analysis and Validation

```python
# Validate code before execution
validation_result = await session.call_tool("validate_code", {
    "code": "import os; os.system('ls')"
})

if validation_result["validation"]["valid"]:
    # Execute if valid
    execution_result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
        "code": "print('Safe code execution')"
    })
```

### Batch Code Execution

```python
# Execute multiple code snippets
code_snippets = [
    "print('Hello, World!')",
    "result = sum(range(10))",
    "import math; print(math.pi)"
]

for code in code_snippets:
    result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
        "code": code,
        "timeout": 5
    })
    print(f"Result: {result}")
```

### Container Mode with Custom Limits

```python
# Execute with specific resource constraints
result = await session.call_tool("execute_code", {
    "code": "import numpy as np; data = np.random.rand(1000, 1000)",
    "use_container": True,
    "memory_limit": "512m",
    "timeout": 60
})
```

## Error Handling

The server handles various error conditions gracefully:

- **Syntax Errors**: Returns detailed syntax error information
- **Runtime Errors**: Captures and returns exception details
- **Timeout Errors**: Handles execution timeouts cleanly
- **Resource Errors**: Manages out-of-memory and resource exhaustion
- **Security Violations**: Blocks and reports dangerous operations

## Monitoring and Logging

- **Execution Tracking**: Each execution gets a unique ID
- **Performance Metrics**: Execution time and resource usage
- **Security Events**: Logs security violations and blocked operations
- **Error Analytics**: Detailed error reporting and categorization

## Deployment Recommendations

### Production Deployment
1. **Container Infrastructure**: Deploy with container orchestration (Kubernetes, Docker Swarm)
2. **Resource Limits**: Set strict CPU and memory limits
3. **Network Policies**: Restrict network access
4. **Monitoring**: Implement comprehensive logging and alerting
5. **Updates**: Regularly update dependencies and container images

### Security Hardening
1. **Use gVisor**: Enable gVisor runtime for container execution
2. **Read-only Filesystem**: Mount filesystems as read-only where possible
3. **SELinux/AppArmor**: Enable additional MAC controls
4. **Audit Logging**: Log all code execution attempts
5. **Rate Limiting**: Implement rate limiting for execution requests

## Limitations

- **No Persistent State**: Each execution is isolated
- **Limited I/O**: File system access is heavily restricted
- **Network Restrictions**: Network access is disabled by default
- **Resource Bounds**: Strict limits on memory and execution time
- **Module Restrictions**: Only safe modules are allowed

## Best Practices

1. **Always Validate**: Use `validate_code` before `execute_code`
2. **Set Appropriate Timeouts**: Balance functionality with security
3. **Use Container Mode**: For untrusted code, use container execution
4. **Monitor Resource Usage**: Track execution metrics
5. **Regular Updates**: Keep RestrictedPython and containers updated
6. **Audit Logs**: Review execution logs regularly for suspicious activity
