docs/docs/architecture/adr/026-hiredis-redis-parser.md, before:

# ADR-0026: Add Hiredis as Default Redis Parser

- *Status:* Accepted
- *Date:* 2025-12-21
- *Deciders:* Core Engineering Team

## Context

MCP Gateway uses redis-py for Redis connections (caching, federation, leader election, metrics). The default pure-Python protocol parser in redis-py has significant overhead, especially for large responses. This impacts performance for:

- Tool registry queries returning many tools
- Bulk operations and federation
- Cached response retrieval
- Metrics aggregation

Hiredis is a minimalistic C client library for Redis that provides significantly faster protocol parsing. The `hiredis` Python package provides Python bindings that redis-py can use as a drop-in replacement for its pure-Python parser.

## Decision

We will use **hiredis** as the **default Redis parser** while providing a pure-Python fallback option.

**Key points:**

- `redis[hiredis]` is the default dependency (includes hiredis)
- `redis-pure` optional dependency available for environments where hiredis wheels aren't available
- Users can switch parsers via the `REDIS_PARSER` environment variable
- Auto-detection (default) uses hiredis if available, falls back to pure-Python

**Usage:**
```bash
# Default: auto-detect (uses hiredis if available)
REDIS_PARSER=auto

# Force pure-Python parser (debugging, restricted environments)
REDIS_PARSER=python

# Require hiredis (fails if not installed)
REDIS_PARSER=hiredis
```

## Performance Benchmarks

Based on hiredis-py benchmarks:

| Operation | Pure Python | With Hiredis | Improvement |
|-----------|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| Simple SET/GET | Baseline | +10% | 1.1x |
| LRANGE (10 items) | Baseline | +170% | 2.7x |
| LRANGE (100 items) | Baseline | +900% | ~10x |
| LRANGE (999 items) | Baseline | +8220% | **83.2x** |

**Key insight:** The larger the response, the greater the improvement. This is critical for MCP Gateway operations that retrieve large datasets from Redis.

### Impact on MCP Gateway

| Use Case | Typical Response Size | Expected Improvement |
|----------|----------------------|---------------------|
| Single tool lookup | Small | 1.1x |
| Tool list (50 tools) | Medium | 5-10x |
| Federation sync | Large | 20-50x |
| Bulk operations | Very large | 50-80x |

## Consequences

### Positive

- **Significantly faster Redis operations** - Up to 83x for large responses
- **Lower latency** - Faster parsing reduces overall request latency
- **Reduced CPU usage** - C extension is more efficient than Python parsing
- **Transparent upgrade** - Existing code works without changes
- **Fallback available** - Pure-Python parser remains an option

### Negative

- **Binary dependency** - Requires compiled C extension
- **Platform coverage** - Wheels may not be available for all platforms (though coverage is excellent)
- **Debugging complexity** - C extension errors harder to debug than pure Python
- **Build requirements** - Building from source requires C compiler

### Neutral

- **Same API** - redis-py API unchanged
- **Same configuration** - Most Redis settings work identically
- **Coexistence** - Both parsers can be installed simultaneously

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `REDIS_PARSER` | `auto` | Parser selection: `auto`, `hiredis`, `python` |

### Parser Selection Logic

```
REDIS_PARSER=auto (default)
├── hiredis installed? → Use HiredisParser
└── hiredis not installed? → Use PythonParser

REDIS_PARSER=hiredis
├── hiredis installed? → Use HiredisParser
└── hiredis not installed? → ERROR (fail startup)

REDIS_PARSER=python
└── Always use PythonParser
```

### Installation Options

```bash
# Default: includes hiredis for performance
pip install "mcp-contextforge-gateway[redis]"

# Pure-Python only (no C dependencies)
pip install "mcp-contextforge-gateway[redis-pure]"
```

## When to Use Each Parser

### Use Hiredis (default) when:

- Running in production environments
- Handling large response payloads
- Maximum throughput is required
- Pre-built wheels are available for your platform

### Use Pure-Python parser when:

- Debugging Redis protocol issues
- Platform lacks hiredis wheel support
- Minimizing binary dependencies
- Running in restricted environments (some containerized/sandboxed setups)

## Files Changed

| File | Change |
|------|--------|
| `pyproject.toml` | Added `redis[hiredis]` as default, `redis-pure` fallback |
| `mcpgateway/config.py` | Added `redis_parser` setting |
| `mcpgateway/utils/redis_client.py` | Parser selection logic |
| `.env.example` | Added `REDIS_PARSER` documentation |
| `docker-compose.yml` | Added `REDIS_PARSER` environment variable |

## Verification

To verify which parser is being used:

```python
from mcpgateway.utils.redis_client import get_redis_parser_info

# Returns: "HiredisParser (C extension)" or "PythonParser (pure-Python)"
print(get_redis_parser_info())
```

Or check the startup logs:

```
Redis client initialized: parser=HiredisParser (C extension, auto-detected), pool_size=50, timeout=2.0s
```

## Recommendation

**For most users: Use the default (auto)**

The default `REDIS_PARSER=auto` setting provides the best experience:

- Uses hiredis when available for maximum performance
- Falls back gracefully to pure-Python if needed
- No configuration required

**Consider `REDIS_PARSER=python` when:**

- Debugging Redis protocol issues
- Troubleshooting connection problems
- Running on platforms without hiredis wheels

## Status

This decision has been implemented. Both parsers are available:

- Hiredis: **Default** (via `redis[hiredis]`)
- Pure-Python: **Fallback** (via `redis-pure` or `REDIS_PARSER=python`)

## References

- GitHub Issue: #1702
- Related ADR: ADR-0025 (Granian HTTP Server - similar pattern)
- Hiredis GitHub: https://github.com/redis/hiredis
- Hiredis-py PyPI: https://pypi.org/project/hiredis/
- Redis-py Documentation: https://redis-py.readthedocs.io/

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/architecture/adr/026-hiredis-redis-parser.md, after:

# ADR-0026: Add Hiredis as Default Redis Parser

- *Status:* Accepted
- *Date:* 2025-12-21
- *Deciders:* Core Engineering Team

## Context

ContextForge uses redis-py for Redis connections (caching, federation, leader election, metrics). The default pure-Python protocol parser in redis-py has significant overhead, especially for large responses. This impacts performance for:

- Tool registry queries returning many tools
- Bulk operations and federation
- Cached response retrieval
- Metrics aggregation

Hiredis is a minimalistic C client library for Redis that provides significantly faster protocol parsing. The `hiredis` Python package provides Python bindings that redis-py can use as a drop-in replacement for its pure-Python parser.

## Decision

We will use **hiredis** as the **default Redis parser** while providing a pure-Python fallback option.

**Key points:**

- `redis[hiredis]` is the default dependency (includes hiredis)
- `redis-pure` optional dependency available for environments where hiredis wheels aren't available
- Users can switch parsers via the `REDIS_PARSER` environment variable
- Auto-detection (default) uses hiredis if available, falls back to pure-Python

**Usage:**
```bash
# Default: auto-detect (uses hiredis if available)
REDIS_PARSER=auto

# Force pure-Python parser (debugging, restricted environments)
REDIS_PARSER=python

# Require hiredis (fails if not installed)
REDIS_PARSER=hiredis
```

## Performance Benchmarks

Based on hiredis-py benchmarks:

| Operation | Pure Python | With Hiredis | Improvement |
|-----------|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| Simple SET/GET | Baseline | +10% | 1.1x |
| LRANGE (10 items) | Baseline | +170% | 2.7x |
| LRANGE (100 items) | Baseline | +900% | ~10x |
| LRANGE (999 items) | Baseline | +8220% | **83.2x** |

**Key insight:** The larger the response, the greater the improvement. This is critical for ContextForge operations that retrieve large datasets from Redis.

### Impact on ContextForge

| Use Case | Typical Response Size | Expected Improvement |
|----------|----------------------|---------------------|
| Single tool lookup | Small | 1.1x |
| Tool list (50 tools) | Medium | 5-10x |
| Federation sync | Large | 20-50x |
| Bulk operations | Very large | 50-80x |

## Consequences

### Positive

- **Significantly faster Redis operations** - Up to 83x for large responses
- **Lower latency** - Faster parsing reduces overall request latency
- **Reduced CPU usage** - C extension is more efficient than Python parsing
- **Transparent upgrade** - Existing code works without changes
- **Fallback available** - Pure-Python parser remains an option

### Negative

- **Binary dependency** - Requires compiled C extension
- **Platform coverage** - Wheels may not be available for all platforms (though coverage is excellent)
- **Debugging complexity** - C extension errors harder to debug than pure Python
- **Build requirements** - Building from source requires C compiler

### Neutral

- **Same API** - redis-py API unchanged
- **Same configuration** - Most Redis settings work identically
- **Coexistence** - Both parsers can be installed simultaneously

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `REDIS_PARSER` | `auto` | Parser selection: `auto`, `hiredis`, `python` |

### Parser Selection Logic

```
REDIS_PARSER=auto (default)
├── hiredis installed? → Use HiredisParser
└── hiredis not installed? → Use PythonParser

REDIS_PARSER=hiredis
├── hiredis installed? → Use HiredisParser
└── hiredis not installed? → ERROR (fail startup)

REDIS_PARSER=python
└── Always use PythonParser
```

### Installation Options

```bash
# Default: includes hiredis for performance
pip install "mcp-contextforge-gateway[redis]"

# Pure-Python only (no C dependencies)
pip install "mcp-contextforge-gateway[redis-pure]"
```

## When to Use Each Parser

### Use Hiredis (default) when:

- Running in production environments
- Handling large response payloads
- Maximum throughput is required
- Pre-built wheels are available for your platform

### Use Pure-Python parser when:

- Debugging Redis protocol issues
- Platform lacks hiredis wheel support
- Minimizing binary dependencies
- Running in restricted environments (some containerized/sandboxed setups)

## Files Changed

| File | Change |
|------|--------|
| `pyproject.toml` | Added `redis[hiredis]` as default, `redis-pure` fallback |
| `mcpgateway/config.py` | Added `redis_parser` setting |
| `mcpgateway/utils/redis_client.py` | Parser selection logic |
| `.env.example` | Added `REDIS_PARSER` documentation |
| `docker-compose.yml` | Added `REDIS_PARSER` environment variable |

## Verification

To verify which parser is being used:

```python
from mcpgateway.utils.redis_client import get_redis_parser_info

# Returns: "HiredisParser (C extension)" or "PythonParser (pure-Python)"
print(get_redis_parser_info())
```

Or check the startup logs:

```
Redis client initialized: parser=HiredisParser (C extension, auto-detected), pool_size=50, timeout=2.0s
```

## Recommendation

**For most users: Use the default (auto)**

The default `REDIS_PARSER=auto` setting provides the best experience:

- Uses hiredis when available for maximum performance
- Falls back gracefully to pure-Python if needed
- No configuration required

**Consider `REDIS_PARSER=python` when:**

- Debugging Redis protocol issues
- Troubleshooting connection problems
- Running on platforms without hiredis wheels

## Status

This decision has been implemented. Both parsers are available:

- Hiredis: **Default** (via `redis[hiredis]`)
- Pure-Python: **Fallback** (via `redis-pure` or `REDIS_PARSER=python`)

## References

- GitHub Issue: #1702
- Related ADR: ADR-0025 (Granian HTTP Server - similar pattern)
- Hiredis GitHub: https://github.com/redis/hiredis
- Hiredis-py PyPI: https://pypi.org/project/hiredis/
- Redis-py Documentation: https://redis-py.readthedocs.io/
