docs/docs/deployment/google-cloud-run.md, before:

# ☁️ Deploying MCP Gateway on Google Cloud Run

MCP Gateway can be deployed to [Google Cloud Run](https://cloud.google.com/run), a fully managed, autoscaling platform for containerized applications. This guide provides step-by-step instructions to provision PostgreSQL and Redis backends, deploy the container, configure environment variables, authenticate using JWT, and monitor logs-all optimized for cost-efficiency.

---

## ✅ Overview

Google Cloud Run is an ideal platform for MCP Gateway due to its:

* **Serverless and cost-efficient** model with scale-to-zero capability.
* **Public HTTPS endpoints** with automatic TLS configuration.
* Seamless integration with **Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL)** and **Memorystore (Redis)**.
* Compatibility with public container registries like GitHub's `ghcr.io`.

You can deploy the public image directly:

```text
ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
```

---

## 🛠 Prerequisites

### 1. Install and Initialize Google Cloud CLI (`gcloud`)

Install the Google Cloud SDK:

* **macOS (Homebrew):**

  ```bash
  brew install --cask google-cloud-sdk
  ```

* **Debian/Ubuntu:**

> These steps also apply to WSL2 running Ubuntu.

  ```bash
  # Update package lists and install necessary utilities
  sudo apt-get update
  sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates gnupg curl

  # Import the Google Cloud public key securely
  # This is for newer distributions (Debian 9+ or Ubuntu 18.04+).
  curl https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/cloud.google.gpg

  # Add the Google Cloud SDK distribution URI as a package source
  # This is for newer distributions, ensuring packages are signed by the key we just added.
  echo "deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/cloud.google.gpg] https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt cloud-sdk main" | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list.d/google-cloud-sdk.list

  # Update your package lists again to recognize the new repository
  sudo apt-get update

  # Install the Google Cloud CLI
  sudo apt-get install -y google-cloud-cli
  ```

* **Windows (PowerShell):**

  ```powershell
  winget install --id Google.CloudSDK
  ```

After installation, initialize the CLI:

```bash
gcloud init
```

Authenticate with your Google Cloud account:

```bash
gcloud auth login
```

Set a project ID:

```bash
gcloud config set project PROJECT_ID
```

### 2. Enable Required APIs

Enable the necessary Google Cloud APIs:

```bash
# This might take a minute..
gcloud services enable \
  run.googleapis.com \
  sqladmin.googleapis.com \
  redis.googleapis.com
```

### 3. Install Docker

Ensure Docker is installed for local testing and JWT token generation. Visit [Docker's official website](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) for installation instructions.

### 4. Set Environment Variables

Prepare the following environment variables:

| Variable              | Description                                           |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `JWT_SECRET_KEY`      | Secret key for signing JWT tokens                     |
| `BASIC_AUTH_USER`     | Username for HTTP Basic Authentication                |
| `BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD` | Password for HTTP Basic Authentication                |
| `AUTH_REQUIRED`       | Set to `true` to enforce authentication               |
| `DATABASE_URL`        | PostgreSQL connection string                          |
| `REDIS_URL`           | Redis connection string                               |
| `CACHE_TYPE`          | Set to `redis` for production environments            |
| `PORT`                | Port number the application listens on (e.g., `4444`) |

Consider creating a `.env.gcr` file where you will record the various settings used during deployment.

```bash
# ─── Google Cloud project ───────────────────────────────────
PROJECT_ID=
REGION=us-central1
SERVICE_NAME=mcpgateway

# ─── Authentication ─────────────────────────────────────────
JWT_SECRET_KEY=
BASIC_AUTH_USER=
BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD=
AUTH_REQUIRED=true

# ─── Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL) ─────────────────────────────────
SQL_INSTANCE=mcpgw-db
SQL_REGION=us-central1
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://postgres:<PASSWORD>@<SQL_IP>:5432/mcpgw

# ─── Memorystore (Redis) ────────────────────────────────────
REDIS_INSTANCE=mcpgw-redis
REDIS_REGION=us-central1
REDIS_URL=redis://<REDIS_IP>:6379/0
CACHE_TYPE=redis

# ─── Application ────────────────────────────────────────────
PORT=4444
```

---

## ⚙️ Setup Steps

### 1. Provision Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL)

Create a PostgreSQL instance using the `db-f1-micro` tier for cost efficiency:

```bash
# POSTGRES_16 and POSTGRES_17 default to Enterprise Plus; adding --edition=ENTERPRISE lets you pick db-f1-micro
gcloud sql instances create mcpgw-db \
  --database-version=POSTGRES_17 \
  --edition=ENTERPRISE \
  --tier=db-f1-micro \
  --region=us-central1
```

Set the password for the `postgres` user:

```bash
gcloud sql users set-password postgres \
  --instance=mcpgw-db \
  --password=mysecretpassword
```

Create the `mcpgw` database:

```bash
gcloud sql databases create mcpgw --instance=mcpgw-db
```

Retrieve the IP address of the instance:

```bash
gcloud sql instances describe mcpgw-db \
  --format="value(ipAddresses.ipAddress)"
```

> **Note:** The `db-f1-micro` tier is a shared-core instance designed for low-cost development and testing environments. It is not covered by the Cloud SQL SLA.

### 2. Provision Memorystore (Redis)

Create a Redis instance using the Basic Tier with 1 GiB capacity:

```bash
gcloud redis instances create mcpgw-redis \
  --region=us-central1 \
  --tier=BASIC \
  --size=1
```

Retrieve the host IP address:

```bash
gcloud redis instances describe mcpgw-redis \
  --region=us-central1 \
  --format="value(host)"
```

> **Note:** The Basic Tier provides a standalone Redis instance suitable for applications that can tolerate potential data loss during failures.

### 3. Deploy to Google Cloud Run

Cloud Run only accepts container images that live in Artifact Registry or the older Container Registry endpoints; anything pulled from the public internet (for example ghcr.io) must first be proxied or copied into Artifact Registry.


#### Set Your Project ID

Begin by setting your Google Cloud project ID as an environment variable:

```bash
export PROJECT_ID="your-project-id"
```

Replace `"your-project-id"` with your actual Google Cloud project ID.

#### Enable Required APIs

Ensure that the necessary Google Cloud APIs are enabled:

```bash
gcloud services enable artifactregistry.googleapis.com
```

#### Create a Remote Repository

Set up a remote repository in Artifact Registry that proxies GitHub Container Registry (GHCR):

```bash
gcloud artifacts repositories create ghcr-remote \
  --project=$PROJECT_ID \
  --repository-format=docker \
  --location=us-central1 \
  --description="Proxy for GitHub Container Registry" \
  --mode=remote-repository \
  --remote-docker-repo=https://ghcr.io
```

#### Retrieve Cloud SQL Instance Connection Name

```bash
gcloud sql instances describe mcpgw-db \
  --format="value(connectionName)"
```

It will output something like this:

```
your-project-id:us-central1:mcpgw-db
```


#### Allow ingress to your database.

Consider only allowing the Cloud Run IP range.

```bash
gcloud sql instances patch mcpgw-db \
  --authorized-networks=0.0.0.0/0
```

#### Deploy the MCP Gateway container with minimal resource allocation:

```bash
gcloud run deploy mcpgateway \
  --image=us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/$PROJECT_ID/ghcr-remote/ibm/mcp-context-forge:latest
  --region=us-central1 \
  --platform=managed \
  --allow-unauthenticated \
  --port=4444 \
  --cpu=1 \
  --memory=512i \
  --max-instances=1 \
  --set-env-vars=\
JWT_SECRET_KEY=jwt-secret-key,\
BASIC_AUTH_USER=admin,\
BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD=changeme,\
AUTH_REQUIRED=true,\
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://postgres:mysecretpassword@<SQL_IP>:5432/mcpgw,\
REDIS_URL=redis://<REDIS_IP>:6379/0,\
CACHE_TYPE=redis,\
HOST=0.0.0.0,\
GUNICORN_WORKERS=1
```

> **Replace `<SQL_IP>` and `<REDIS_IP>`** with the actual IP addresses obtained from the previous steps.
> Do not leave out the HOST=0.0.0.0 to ensure the container listens on all ports, or the container engine won't be able to reach the container.
> Setting the number of GUNICORN_WORKERS lets you control how much memory the service consumes.

#### Check the logs

```bash
gcloud run services logs read mcpgateway --region=us-central1
```
---

#### Check that the database is created:

You can use any PostgreSQL client, such as `psql`. You should see the list of tables when using `dt;`

```bash
psql postgresql+psycopg://postgres:mysecretpassword@<SQL_IP>:5432/mcpgw

mcpgw=> \dt;
                    List of relations
 Schema |             Name             | Type  |  Owner
--------+------------------------------+-------+----------
 public | gateways                     | table | postgres
 public | mcp_messages                 | table | postgres
 public | mcp_sessions                 | table | postgres
 public | prompt_gateway_association   | table | postgres
 public | prompt_metrics               | table | postgres
 public | prompts                      | table | postgres
 public | resource_gateway_association | table | postgres
 public | resource_metrics             | table | postgres
 public | resource_subscriptions       | table | postgres
 public | resources                    | table | postgres
 public | server_metrics               | table | postgres
 public | server_prompt_association    | table | postgres
 public | server_resource_association  | table | postgres
 public | server_tool_association      | table | postgres
 public | servers                      | table | postgres
 public | tool_gateway_association     | table | postgres
 public | tool_metrics                 | table | postgres
 public | tools                        | table | postgres
(18 rows)
```

## 🔒 Authentication and Access

### Generate a JWT Bearer Token

Use the MCP Gateway container to generate a JWT token:

```bash
docker run -it --rm ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1 \
  python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret jwt-secret-key
```

Export the token as an environment variable:

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=<paste-token-here>
```

### Perform Smoke Tests

Test the `/health`, `/version`, and `/tools` endpoints:

```bash
# Check that the service is healthy
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     https://<your-cloud-run-url>/health

# Check that version reports the version and show Postgres/Redis as connected
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     https://<your-cloud-run-url>/health

# Check that tools return an empty list []
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     https://<your-cloud-run-url>/tools
```

> **Replace `<your-cloud-run-url>`** with the URL provided after deploying the service.

---

## 📊 Logs and Monitoring

### View Logs via CLI

Tailing real-time logs requires `google-cloud-cli-log-streaming`. Ex: `sudo apt-get install google-cloud-cli-log-streaming`:

```bash
gcloud beta run services logs tail mcpgateway --region=us-central1
```
### Access Logs via Console

Navigate to the [Cloud Run Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/run) and select your service to view logs and metrics.

---

## 📦 GitHub Actions Deployment (Optional)

Automate builds and deployments using GitHub Actions. Refer to the workflow file:

```
.github/workflows/google-cloud-run.yml
```

This workflow:

* Restores and updates a local BuildKit layer cache.
* Builds the Docker image from `Containerfile.lite`.
* Pushes the image to Google Artifact Registry.
* Deploys to Google Cloud Run with `--max-instances=1`.

### Setting up permissions for Google Cloud Run deployment

Instead of project-wide permissions, grant permissions on specific resources:

```bash
# Create service account
gcloud iam service-accounts create github-mcpgateway \
  --display-name="GitHub MCP Gateway Deploy"

# Grant permission ONLY on the specific Cloud Run service
gcloud run services add-iam-policy-binding mcpgateway \
  --region=us-central1 \
  --member="serviceAccount:github-mcpgateway@YOUR-PROJECT-ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com" \
  --role="roles/run.developer"

# Grant permission ONLY on the specific Artifact Registry repository
gcloud artifacts repositories add-iam-policy-binding mcpgateway \
  --location=us-central1 \
  --member="serviceAccount:github-mcpgateway@YOUR-PROJECT-ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com" \
  --role="roles/artifactregistry.writer"

# Create the key
gcloud iam service-accounts keys create restricted-key.json \
  --iam-account=github-mcpgateway@YOUR-PROJECT-ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

---

## 📘 Notes and Tips

* **HTTPS by Default:** Cloud Run services are accessible over HTTPS without additional configuration.
* **Custom Domains:** You can map custom domains via the Cloud Run settings.
* **Secret Management:** Consider using [Secret Manager](https://cloud.google.com/secret-manager) for managing sensitive environment variables.
* **Cold Starts:** To reduce cold start latency, set a minimum number of instances:

  ```bash
  --min-instances=1
  ```

* **Monitoring:** Utilize [Cloud Monitoring](https://cloud.google.com/monitoring) for detailed metrics and alerts.

---

## 🧩 Feature Summary

| Feature                | Supported |
| ---------------------- | --------- |
| HTTPS (built-in)       | ✅        |
| Custom domains         | ✅        |
| PostgreSQL (Cloud SQL) | ✅        |
| Redis (Memorystore)    | ✅        |
| Auto-scaling           | ✅        |
| Scale-to-zero          | ✅        |
| Max instance limit     | ✅        |

---

## 🧠 Additional Resources

* [Cloud Run Documentation](https://cloud.google.com/run/docs)
* [Cloud SQL for PostgreSQL Documentation](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/postgres)
* [Memorystore for Redis Documentation](https://cloud.google.com/memorystore/docs/redis)
* [Google Cloud SDK Installation Guide](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install)
* [Cloud Run Pricing](https://cloud.google.com/run/pricing)
* [Cloud SQL Pricing](https://cloud.google.com/sql/pricing)
* [Memorystore Pricing](https://cloud.google.com/memorystore/docs/redis/pricing)

---

By following this guide, you can deploy MCP Gateway on Google Cloud Run using the most cost-effective configurations, ensuring efficient resource utilization and seamless scalability.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/deployment/google-cloud-run.md, after:

# ☁️ Deploying ContextForge on Google Cloud Run

ContextForge can be deployed to [Google Cloud Run](https://cloud.google.com/run), a fully managed, autoscaling platform for containerized applications. This guide provides step-by-step instructions to provision PostgreSQL and Redis backends, deploy the container, configure environment variables, authenticate using JWT, and monitor logs-all optimized for cost-efficiency.

---

## ✅ Overview

Google Cloud Run is an ideal platform for ContextForge due to its:

* **Serverless and cost-efficient** model with scale-to-zero capability.
* **Public HTTPS endpoints** with automatic TLS configuration.
* Seamless integration with **Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL)** and **Memorystore (Redis)**.
* Compatibility with public container registries like GitHub's `ghcr.io`.

You can deploy the public image directly:

```text
ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
```

---

## 🛠 Prerequisites

### 1. Install and Initialize Google Cloud CLI (`gcloud`)

Install the Google Cloud SDK:

* **macOS (Homebrew):**

  ```bash
  brew install --cask google-cloud-sdk
  ```

* **Debian/Ubuntu:**

> These steps also apply to WSL2 running Ubuntu.

  ```bash
  # Update package lists and install necessary utilities
  sudo apt-get update
  sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates gnupg curl

  # Import the Google Cloud public key securely
  # This is for newer distributions (Debian 9+ or Ubuntu 18.04+).
  curl https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/cloud.google.gpg

  # Add the Google Cloud SDK distribution URI as a package source
  # This is for newer distributions, ensuring packages are signed by the key we just added.
  echo "deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/cloud.google.gpg] https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt cloud-sdk main" | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list.d/google-cloud-sdk.list

  # Update your package lists again to recognize the new repository
  sudo apt-get update

  # Install the Google Cloud CLI
  sudo apt-get install -y google-cloud-cli
  ```

* **Windows (PowerShell):**

  ```powershell
  winget install --id Google.CloudSDK
  ```

After installation, initialize the CLI:

```bash
gcloud init
```

Authenticate with your Google Cloud account:

```bash
gcloud auth login
```

Set a project ID:

```bash
gcloud config set project PROJECT_ID
```

### 2. Enable Required APIs

Enable the necessary Google Cloud APIs:

```bash
# This might take a minute..
gcloud services enable \
  run.googleapis.com \
  sqladmin.googleapis.com \
  redis.googleapis.com
```

### 3. Install Docker

Ensure Docker is installed for local testing and JWT token generation. Visit [Docker's official website](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) for installation instructions.

### 4. Set Environment Variables

Prepare the following environment variables:

| Variable              | Description                                           |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `JWT_SECRET_KEY`      | Secret key for signing JWT tokens                     |
| `BASIC_AUTH_USER`     | Username for HTTP Basic Authentication                |
| `BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD` | Password for HTTP Basic Authentication                |
| `AUTH_REQUIRED`       | Set to `true` to enforce authentication               |
| `DATABASE_URL`        | PostgreSQL connection string                          |
| `REDIS_URL`           | Redis connection string                               |
| `CACHE_TYPE`          | Set to `redis` for production environments            |
| `PORT`                | Port number the application listens on (e.g., `4444`) |

Consider creating a `.env.gcr` file where you will record the various settings used during deployment.

```bash
# ─── Google Cloud project ───────────────────────────────────
PROJECT_ID=
REGION=us-central1
SERVICE_NAME=mcpgateway

# ─── Authentication ─────────────────────────────────────────
JWT_SECRET_KEY=
BASIC_AUTH_USER=
BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD=
AUTH_REQUIRED=true

# ─── Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL) ─────────────────────────────────
SQL_INSTANCE=mcpgw-db
SQL_REGION=us-central1
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://postgres:<PASSWORD>@<SQL_IP>:5432/mcpgw

# ─── Memorystore (Redis) ────────────────────────────────────
REDIS_INSTANCE=mcpgw-redis
REDIS_REGION=us-central1
REDIS_URL=redis://<REDIS_IP>:6379/0
CACHE_TYPE=redis

# ─── Application ────────────────────────────────────────────
PORT=4444
```

---

## ⚙️ Setup Steps

### 1. Provision Cloud SQL (PostgreSQL)

Create a PostgreSQL instance using the `db-f1-micro` tier for cost efficiency:

```bash
# POSTGRES_16 and POSTGRES_17 default to Enterprise Plus; adding --edition=ENTERPRISE lets you pick db-f1-micro
gcloud sql instances create mcpgw-db \
  --database-version=POSTGRES_17 \
  --edition=ENTERPRISE \
  --tier=db-f1-micro \
  --region=us-central1
```

Set the password for the `postgres` user:

```bash
gcloud sql users set-password postgres \
  --instance=mcpgw-db \
  --password=mysecretpassword
```

Create the `mcpgw` database:

```bash
gcloud sql databases create mcpgw --instance=mcpgw-db
```

Retrieve the IP address of the instance:

```bash
gcloud sql instances describe mcpgw-db \
  --format="value(ipAddresses.ipAddress)"
```

> **Note:** The `db-f1-micro` tier is a shared-core instance designed for low-cost development and testing environments. It is not covered by the Cloud SQL SLA.

### 2. Provision Memorystore (Redis)

Create a Redis instance using the Basic Tier with 1 GiB capacity:

```bash
gcloud redis instances create mcpgw-redis \
  --region=us-central1 \
  --tier=BASIC \
  --size=1
```

Retrieve the host IP address:

```bash
gcloud redis instances describe mcpgw-redis \
  --region=us-central1 \
  --format="value(host)"
```

> **Note:** The Basic Tier provides a standalone Redis instance suitable for applications that can tolerate potential data loss during failures.

### 3. Deploy to Google Cloud Run

Cloud Run only accepts container images that live in Artifact Registry or the older Container Registry endpoints; anything pulled from the public internet (for example ghcr.io) must first be proxied or copied into Artifact Registry.


#### Set Your Project ID

Begin by setting your Google Cloud project ID as an environment variable:

```bash
export PROJECT_ID="your-project-id"
```

Replace `"your-project-id"` with your actual Google Cloud project ID.

#### Enable Required APIs

Ensure that the necessary Google Cloud APIs are enabled:

```bash
gcloud services enable artifactregistry.googleapis.com
```

#### Create a Remote Repository

Set up a remote repository in Artifact Registry that proxies GitHub Container Registry (GHCR):

```bash
gcloud artifacts repositories create ghcr-remote \
  --project=$PROJECT_ID \
  --repository-format=docker \
  --location=us-central1 \
  --description="Proxy for GitHub Container Registry" \
  --mode=remote-repository \
  --remote-docker-repo=https://ghcr.io
```

#### Retrieve Cloud SQL Instance Connection Name

```bash
gcloud sql instances describe mcpgw-db \
  --format="value(connectionName)"
```

It will output something like this:

```
your-project-id:us-central1:mcpgw-db
```


#### Allow ingress to your database.

Consider only allowing the Cloud Run IP range.

```bash
gcloud sql instances patch mcpgw-db \
  --authorized-networks=0.0.0.0/0
```

#### Deploy the ContextForge container with minimal resource allocation:

```bash
gcloud run deploy mcpgateway \
  --image=us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/$PROJECT_ID/ghcr-remote/ibm/mcp-context-forge:latest
  --region=us-central1 \
  --platform=managed \
  --allow-unauthenticated \
  --port=4444 \
  --cpu=1 \
  --memory=512i \
  --max-instances=1 \
  --set-env-vars=\
JWT_SECRET_KEY=jwt-secret-key,\
BASIC_AUTH_USER=admin,\
BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD=changeme,\
AUTH_REQUIRED=true,\
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://postgres:mysecretpassword@<SQL_IP>:5432/mcpgw,\
REDIS_URL=redis://<REDIS_IP>:6379/0,\
CACHE_TYPE=redis,\
HOST=0.0.0.0,\
GUNICORN_WORKERS=1
```

> **Replace `<SQL_IP>` and `<REDIS_IP>`** with the actual IP addresses obtained from the previous steps.
> Do not leave out the HOST=0.0.0.0 to ensure the container listens on all ports, or the container engine won't be able to reach the container.
> Setting the number of GUNICORN_WORKERS lets you control how much memory the service consumes.

#### Check the logs

```bash
gcloud run services logs read mcpgateway --region=us-central1
```
---

#### Check that the database is created:

You can use any PostgreSQL client, such as `psql`. You should see the list of tables when using `dt;`

```bash
psql postgresql+psycopg://postgres:mysecretpassword@<SQL_IP>:5432/mcpgw

mcpgw=> \dt;
                    List of relations
 Schema |             Name             | Type  |  Owner
--------+------------------------------+-------+----------
 public | gateways                     | table | postgres
 public | mcp_messages                 | table | postgres
 public | mcp_sessions                 | table | postgres
 public | prompt_gateway_association   | table | postgres
 public | prompt_metrics               | table | postgres
 public | prompts                      | table | postgres
 public | resource_gateway_association | table | postgres
 public | resource_metrics             | table | postgres
 public | resource_subscriptions       | table | postgres
 public | resources                    | table | postgres
 public | server_metrics               | table | postgres
 public | server_prompt_association    | table | postgres
 public | server_resource_association  | table | postgres
 public | server_tool_association      | table | postgres
 public | servers                      | table | postgres
 public | tool_gateway_association     | table | postgres
 public | tool_metrics                 | table | postgres
 public | tools                        | table | postgres
(18 rows)
```

## 🔒 Authentication and Access

### Generate a JWT Bearer Token

Use the ContextForge container to generate a JWT token:

```bash
docker run -it --rm ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1 \
  python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret jwt-secret-key
```

Export the token as an environment variable:

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=<paste-token-here>
```

### Perform Smoke Tests

Test the `/health`, `/version`, and `/tools` endpoints:

```bash
# Check that the service is healthy
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     https://<your-cloud-run-url>/health

# Check that version reports the version and show Postgres/Redis as connected
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     https://<your-cloud-run-url>/health

# Check that tools return an empty list []
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     https://<your-cloud-run-url>/tools
```

> **Replace `<your-cloud-run-url>`** with the URL provided after deploying the service.

---

## 📊 Logs and Monitoring

### View Logs via CLI

Tailing real-time logs requires `google-cloud-cli-log-streaming`. Ex: `sudo apt-get install google-cloud-cli-log-streaming`:

```bash
gcloud beta run services logs tail mcpgateway --region=us-central1
```
### Access Logs via Console

Navigate to the [Cloud Run Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/run) and select your service to view logs and metrics.

---

## 📦 GitHub Actions Deployment (Optional)

Automate builds and deployments using GitHub Actions. Refer to the workflow file:

```
.github/workflows/google-cloud-run.yml
```

This workflow:

* Restores and updates a local BuildKit layer cache.
* Builds the Docker image from `Containerfile.lite`.
* Pushes the image to Google Artifact Registry.
* Deploys to Google Cloud Run with `--max-instances=1`.

### Setting up permissions for Google Cloud Run deployment

Instead of project-wide permissions, grant permissions on specific resources:

```bash
# Create service account
gcloud iam service-accounts create github-mcpgateway \
  --display-name="GitHub ContextForge Deploy"

# Grant permission ONLY on the specific Cloud Run service
gcloud run services add-iam-policy-binding mcpgateway \
  --region=us-central1 \
  --member="serviceAccount:github-mcpgateway@YOUR-PROJECT-ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com" \
  --role="roles/run.developer"

# Grant permission ONLY on the specific Artifact Registry repository
gcloud artifacts repositories add-iam-policy-binding mcpgateway \
  --location=us-central1 \
  --member="serviceAccount:github-mcpgateway@YOUR-PROJECT-ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com" \
  --role="roles/artifactregistry.writer"

# Create the key
gcloud iam service-accounts keys create restricted-key.json \
  --iam-account=github-mcpgateway@YOUR-PROJECT-ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

---

## 📘 Notes and Tips

* **HTTPS by Default:** Cloud Run services are accessible over HTTPS without additional configuration.
* **Custom Domains:** You can map custom domains via the Cloud Run settings.
* **Secret Management:** Consider using [Secret Manager](https://cloud.google.com/secret-manager) for managing sensitive environment variables.
* **Cold Starts:** To reduce cold start latency, set a minimum number of instances:

  ```bash
  --min-instances=1
  ```

* **Monitoring:** Utilize [Cloud Monitoring](https://cloud.google.com/monitoring) for detailed metrics and alerts.

---

## 🧩 Feature Summary

| Feature                | Supported |
| ---------------------- | --------- |
| HTTPS (built-in)       | ✅        |
| Custom domains         | ✅        |
| PostgreSQL (Cloud SQL) | ✅        |
| Redis (Memorystore)    | ✅        |
| Auto-scaling           | ✅        |
| Scale-to-zero          | ✅        |
| Max instance limit     | ✅        |

---

## 🧠 Additional Resources

* [Cloud Run Documentation](https://cloud.google.com/run/docs)
* [Cloud SQL for PostgreSQL Documentation](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/postgres)
* [Memorystore for Redis Documentation](https://cloud.google.com/memorystore/docs/redis)
* [Google Cloud SDK Installation Guide](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install)
* [Cloud Run Pricing](https://cloud.google.com/run/pricing)
* [Cloud SQL Pricing](https://cloud.google.com/sql/pricing)
* [Memorystore Pricing](https://cloud.google.com/memorystore/docs/redis/pricing)

---

By following this guide, you can deploy ContextForge on Google Cloud Run using the most cost-effective configurations, ensuring efficient resource utilization and seamless scalability.
