docs/docs/deployment/index.md, before:

# Deployment Overview

This section explains how to deploy MCP Gateway in various environments - from local development to cloud-native platforms like Kubernetes, IBM Code Engine, AWS, and Azure.

---

## 🔐 Security First

**Before deploying to production**, review our [Security Guide](../manage/securing.md) for:

- Critical security configurations
- Production hardening checklist
- Authentication and authorization setup
- Network security best practices
- Container security requirements

---

## 🗺 Deployment Options

MCP Gateway supports multiple deployment strategies:

| Method                                | Description                                                                               |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Local](local.md)                     | Run directly on your dev machine using `make`, `uvicorn`, or a virtual-env                |
| [Container](container.md)             | Package and run as a single container image using Podman or Docker                        |
| [Compose Stack](compose.md)           | Bring up Gateway + Postgres + Redis (and optional MCP servers) with Podman/Docker Compose |
| [Minikube](minikube.md)               | Launch a local single-node Kubernetes cluster and deploy the Gateway stack                |
| [Kubernetes](kubernetes.md)           | Generic manifests or Helm chart for any K8s-compliant platform                            |
| [OpenShift](openshift.md)             | OpenShift-specific deployment using Routes, SCCs, and Operator-managed back-ends          |
| [IBM Code Engine](ibm-code-engine.md) | Serverless container build & run on IBM Cloud                                             |
| [AWS](aws.md)                         | Deploy on ECS Fargate, EKS, or EC2-hosted containers                                      |
| [Azure](azure.md)                     | Run on Azure Container Apps, App Service, or AKS                                          |
| [**Security Guide**](../manage/securing.md)     | **Essential security configurations and best practices for production deployments**        |
| [**Performance Architecture**](../architecture/performance-architecture.md) | **Visual overview of Rust-powered components, caching layers, and scaling architecture** |

---

## 🛠 Runtime Configuration

MCP Gateway loads configuration from:

- `.env` file (in project root or mounted at `/app/.env`)
- Environment variables (overrides `.env`)
- CLI flags (e.g., via `run.sh`)

⚠️ **Security Note**: Never store sensitive credentials directly in environment variables. Use a secrets management system in production. See the [Security Guide](../manage/securing.md#10-secrets-management) for details.

---

## 🧪 Health Checks

All deployments should expose:

```bash
GET /health
```

This returns a basic health status (`{"status":"healthy"}`) and can be used with cloud provider readiness probes.

---

## 📦 Container Basics

The default container image:

* Uses the Red Hat Universal Base image running as a non-root user
* Exposes port `4444`
* Runs `gunicorn` with Uvicorn workers
* Uses `.env` for all settings

> For Kubernetes, you can mount a ConfigMap or Secret as `.env`.

**Important**: For production deployments, ensure you follow the container hardening guidelines in our [Security Guide](../manage/securing.md#9-container-security).

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/deployment/index.md, after:

# Deployment Overview

This section explains how to deploy ContextForge in various environments - from local development to cloud-native platforms like Kubernetes, IBM Code Engine, AWS, and Azure.

---

## 🔐 Security First

**Before deploying to production**, review our [Security Guide](../manage/securing.md) for:

- Critical security configurations
- Production hardening checklist
- Authentication and authorization setup
- Network security best practices
- Container security requirements

---

## 🗺 Deployment Options

ContextForge supports multiple deployment strategies:

| Method                                | Description                                                                               |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Local](local.md)                     | Run directly on your dev machine using `make`, `uvicorn`, or a virtual-env                |
| [Container](container.md)             | Package and run as a single container image using Podman or Docker                        |
| [Compose Stack](compose.md)           | Bring up Gateway + Postgres + Redis (and optional MCP servers) with Podman/Docker Compose |
| [Minikube](minikube.md)               | Launch a local single-node Kubernetes cluster and deploy the Gateway stack                |
| [Kubernetes](kubernetes.md)           | Generic manifests or Helm chart for any K8s-compliant platform                            |
| [OpenShift](openshift.md)             | OpenShift-specific deployment using Routes, SCCs, and Operator-managed back-ends          |
| [IBM Code Engine](ibm-code-engine.md) | Serverless container build & run on IBM Cloud                                             |
| [AWS](aws.md)                         | Deploy on ECS Fargate, EKS, or EC2-hosted containers                                      |
| [Azure](azure.md)                     | Run on Azure Container Apps, App Service, or AKS                                          |
| [**Security Guide**](../manage/securing.md)     | **Essential security configurations and best practices for production deployments**        |
| [**Performance Architecture**](../architecture/performance-architecture.md) | **Visual overview of Rust-powered components, caching layers, and scaling architecture** |

---

## 🛠 Runtime Configuration

ContextForge loads configuration from:

- `.env` file (in project root or mounted at `/app/.env`)
- Environment variables (overrides `.env`)
- CLI flags (e.g., via `run.sh`)

⚠️ **Security Note**: Never store sensitive credentials directly in environment variables. Use a secrets management system in production. See the [Security Guide](../manage/securing.md#10-secrets-management) for details.

---

## 🧪 Health Checks

All deployments should expose:

```bash
GET /health
```

This returns a basic health status (`{"status":"healthy"}`) and can be used with cloud provider readiness probes.

---

## 📦 Container Basics

The default container image:

* Uses the Red Hat Universal Base image running as a non-root user
* Exposes port `4444`
* Runs `gunicorn` with Uvicorn workers
* Uses `.env` for all settings

> For Kubernetes, you can mount a ConfigMap or Secret as `.env`.

**Important**: For production deployments, ensure you follow the container hardening guidelines in our [Security Guide](../manage/securing.md#9-container-security).
