docs/docs/deployment/postgresql-schema-configuration.md, before:

# PostgreSQL Schema Configuration Support

## Overview

MCP Gateway now supports custom PostgreSQL schema configuration via the `search_path` parameter. This feature addresses [Issue #1535](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1535) and enables deployment in enterprise PostgreSQL environments where access to the `public` schema is restricted.

## Problem Statement

Enterprise PostgreSQL environments often restrict access to the `public` schema for security reasons. Previously, MCP Gateway could only use the default `public` schema, preventing deployment in such environments without database-level workarounds.

## Solution

Users can now specify a custom PostgreSQL schema by including the `options` query parameter in the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable. The schema must exist before deploying MCP Gateway.

## Configuration

### Basic Usage

Set the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable with the `options` parameter:

```bash
# Single custom schema
export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+psycopg://user:password@host:5432/dbname?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway"

# Multiple schemas in search path (searches mcp_gateway first, then public)
export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+psycopg://user:password@host:5432/dbname?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway,public"
```

### URL Encoding

The `options` parameter must be URL-encoded:

- Space (` `) → `%20`
- Comma (`,`) → `%2C` (optional, usually works without encoding)

### Docker/Docker Compose

```yaml
version: '3.8'
services:
  mcpgateway:
    image: mcpgateway:latest
    environment:
      - DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://user:password@postgres:5432/mcp?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway
    depends_on:
      - postgres

  postgres:
    image: postgres:15
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_DB=mcp
      - POSTGRES_USER=user
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password
    volumes:
      - ./init-schema.sql:/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d/init-schema.sql
```

### Kubernetes

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: mcpgateway-config
data:
  DATABASE_URL: "postgresql+psycopg://$(DB_USER):$(DB_PASS)@postgres:5432/mcp?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway"
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcpgateway
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: mcpgateway
        image: mcpgateway:latest
        env:
        - name: DATABASE_URL
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: mcpgateway-config
              key: DATABASE_URL
```

## Prerequisites

### 1. Create the Schema

The custom schema must exist before deploying MCP Gateway. Connect to your PostgreSQL database and run:

```sql
-- Create the schema
CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS mcp_gateway;

-- Grant necessary permissions to your application user
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;

-- Set default privileges for future objects
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway
  GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON TABLES TO your_app_user;
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway
  GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON SEQUENCES TO your_app_user;
```

### 2. Verify Schema Access

Test that your user can access the schema:

```sql
-- Connect as your application user
SET search_path TO mcp_gateway;

-- Verify you can create tables
CREATE TABLE test_table (id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY);
DROP TABLE test_table;
```

## Migration from Public Schema

If you're migrating an existing deployment from the `public` schema to a custom schema:

### Option 1: Fresh Installation

1. Create the new schema
2. Update `DATABASE_URL` with the new schema
3. Deploy MCP Gateway (it will create tables in the new schema)
4. Migrate data from old schema if needed

### Option 2: Schema Migration

```sql
-- 1. Create new schema
CREATE SCHEMA mcp_gateway;

-- 2. Move all tables to new schema
DO $$
DECLARE
    row record;
BEGIN
    FOR row IN
        SELECT tablename
        FROM pg_tables
        WHERE schemaname = 'public'
        AND tablename LIKE 'mcp_%'
    LOOP
        EXECUTE 'ALTER TABLE public.' || quote_ident(row.tablename) ||
                ' SET SCHEMA mcp_gateway';
    END LOOP;
END $$;

-- 3. Update DATABASE_URL and restart MCP Gateway
```

## Troubleshooting

### Tables Created in Wrong Schema

**Symptom**: Tables are still being created in `public` schema

**Solution**:

1. Verify the `DATABASE_URL` includes the `options` parameter
2. Check URL encoding is correct (space = `%20`)
3. Restart the application to pick up the new configuration

### Permission Denied Errors

**Symptom**: `ERROR: permission denied for schema mcp_gateway`

**Solution**:
```sql
-- Grant schema usage
GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT CREATE ON SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;

-- Grant permissions on existing objects
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
```

### Schema Does Not Exist

**Symptom**: `ERROR: schema "mcp_gateway" does not exist`

**Solution**: Create the schema before deploying:
```sql
CREATE SCHEMA mcp_gateway;
```

### Connection Fails with Options Parameter

**Symptom**: Connection fails when `options` parameter is added

**Solution**:

1. Verify PostgreSQL version supports the `options` parameter (PostgreSQL 9.0+)
2. Check that the psycopg3 driver is being used (not asyncpg)
3. Verify URL encoding is correct

## Technical Details

### How It Works

1. The `DATABASE_URL` is parsed by SQLAlchemy's `make_url()` function
2. The `options` query parameter is extracted from the URL
3. The options are passed to psycopg via the `connect_args` dictionary
4. PostgreSQL applies the `search_path` setting for all connections
5. All table operations use the specified schema

### Supported Databases

- ✅ **PostgreSQL**: Full support via `options` parameter
- ⚠️ **SQLite**: Ignores `options` parameter (no effect)
- ⚠️ **MySQL/MariaDB**: Ignores `options` parameter (use database name instead)

### Alembic Migrations

Alembic migrations automatically respect the `search_path` setting:

- Tables are created in the first schema in `search_path`
- Migrations work seamlessly with custom schemas
- No special configuration needed

## Examples

### Development Environment

```bash
# .env file
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://dev:devpass@localhost:5432/mcp_dev?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway
```

### Production Environment

```bash
# Secure production setup with restricted public schema
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://mcp_app:${DB_PASSWORD}@db.prod.example.com:5432/mcp_prod?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway&sslmode=require
```

### Multi-Schema Setup

```bash
# Search mcp_gateway first, fall back to shared schema
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://user:pass@host:5432/db?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway,shared,public
```

## Security Considerations

1. **Schema Isolation**: Using a custom schema provides logical separation from other applications
2. **Permission Control**: Restrict access to the schema at the database level
3. **Audit Trail**: Schema-level permissions make it easier to audit access
4. **No Public Access**: Eliminates dependency on the `public` schema

## References

- [PostgreSQL search_path Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-schemas.html#DDL-SCHEMAS-PATH)
- [Psycopg3 Connection Options](https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/docs/api/connections.html)
- [GitHub Issue #1535](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1535)

## Support

For issues or questions:

1. Check the troubleshooting section above
2. Review the [GitHub issue](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1535)
3. Open a new issue with details about your setup

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/deployment/postgresql-schema-configuration.md, after:

# PostgreSQL Schema Configuration Support

## Overview

ContextForge now supports custom PostgreSQL schema configuration via the `search_path` parameter. This feature addresses [Issue #1535](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1535) and enables deployment in enterprise PostgreSQL environments where access to the `public` schema is restricted.

## Problem Statement

Enterprise PostgreSQL environments often restrict access to the `public` schema for security reasons. Previously, ContextForge could only use the default `public` schema, preventing deployment in such environments without database-level workarounds.

## Solution

Users can now specify a custom PostgreSQL schema by including the `options` query parameter in the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable. The schema must exist before deploying ContextForge.

## Configuration

### Basic Usage

Set the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable with the `options` parameter:

```bash
# Single custom schema
export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+psycopg://user:password@host:5432/dbname?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway"

# Multiple schemas in search path (searches mcp_gateway first, then public)
export DATABASE_URL="postgresql+psycopg://user:password@host:5432/dbname?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway,public"
```

### URL Encoding

The `options` parameter must be URL-encoded:

- Space (` `) → `%20`
- Comma (`,`) → `%2C` (optional, usually works without encoding)

### Docker/Docker Compose

```yaml
version: '3.8'
services:
  mcpgateway:
    image: mcpgateway:latest
    environment:
      - DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://user:password@postgres:5432/mcp?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway
    depends_on:
      - postgres

  postgres:
    image: postgres:15
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_DB=mcp
      - POSTGRES_USER=user
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password
    volumes:
      - ./init-schema.sql:/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d/init-schema.sql
```

### Kubernetes

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: mcpgateway-config
data:
  DATABASE_URL: "postgresql+psycopg://$(DB_USER):$(DB_PASS)@postgres:5432/mcp?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway"
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcpgateway
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: mcpgateway
        image: mcpgateway:latest
        env:
        - name: DATABASE_URL
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: mcpgateway-config
              key: DATABASE_URL
```

## Prerequisites

### 1. Create the Schema

The custom schema must exist before deploying ContextForge. Connect to your PostgreSQL database and run:

```sql
-- Create the schema
CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS mcp_gateway;

-- Grant necessary permissions to your application user
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;

-- Set default privileges for future objects
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway
  GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON TABLES TO your_app_user;
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway
  GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON SEQUENCES TO your_app_user;
```

### 2. Verify Schema Access

Test that your user can access the schema:

```sql
-- Connect as your application user
SET search_path TO mcp_gateway;

-- Verify you can create tables
CREATE TABLE test_table (id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY);
DROP TABLE test_table;
```

## Migration from Public Schema

If you're migrating an existing deployment from the `public` schema to a custom schema:

### Option 1: Fresh Installation

1. Create the new schema
2. Update `DATABASE_URL` with the new schema
3. Deploy ContextForge (it will create tables in the new schema)
4. Migrate data from old schema if needed

### Option 2: Schema Migration

```sql
-- 1. Create new schema
CREATE SCHEMA mcp_gateway;

-- 2. Move all tables to new schema
DO $$
DECLARE
    row record;
BEGIN
    FOR row IN
        SELECT tablename
        FROM pg_tables
        WHERE schemaname = 'public'
        AND tablename LIKE 'mcp_%'
    LOOP
        EXECUTE 'ALTER TABLE public.' || quote_ident(row.tablename) ||
                ' SET SCHEMA mcp_gateway';
    END LOOP;
END $$;

-- 3. Update DATABASE_URL and restart ContextForge
```

## Troubleshooting

### Tables Created in Wrong Schema

**Symptom**: Tables are still being created in `public` schema

**Solution**:

1. Verify the `DATABASE_URL` includes the `options` parameter
2. Check URL encoding is correct (space = `%20`)
3. Restart the application to pick up the new configuration

### Permission Denied Errors

**Symptom**: `ERROR: permission denied for schema mcp_gateway`

**Solution**:
```sql
-- Grant schema usage
GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT CREATE ON SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;

-- Grant permissions on existing objects
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL SEQUENCES IN SCHEMA mcp_gateway TO your_app_user;
```

### Schema Does Not Exist

**Symptom**: `ERROR: schema "mcp_gateway" does not exist`

**Solution**: Create the schema before deploying:
```sql
CREATE SCHEMA mcp_gateway;
```

### Connection Fails with Options Parameter

**Symptom**: Connection fails when `options` parameter is added

**Solution**:

1. Verify PostgreSQL version supports the `options` parameter (PostgreSQL 9.0+)
2. Check that the psycopg3 driver is being used (not asyncpg)
3. Verify URL encoding is correct

## Technical Details

### How It Works

1. The `DATABASE_URL` is parsed by SQLAlchemy's `make_url()` function
2. The `options` query parameter is extracted from the URL
3. The options are passed to psycopg via the `connect_args` dictionary
4. PostgreSQL applies the `search_path` setting for all connections
5. All table operations use the specified schema

### Supported Databases

- ✅ **PostgreSQL**: Full support via `options` parameter
- ⚠️ **SQLite**: Ignores `options` parameter (no effect)
- ⚠️ **MySQL/MariaDB**: Ignores `options` parameter (use database name instead)

### Alembic Migrations

Alembic migrations automatically respect the `search_path` setting:

- Tables are created in the first schema in `search_path`
- Migrations work seamlessly with custom schemas
- No special configuration needed

## Examples

### Development Environment

```bash
# .env file
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://dev:devpass@localhost:5432/mcp_dev?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway
```

### Production Environment

```bash
# Secure production setup with restricted public schema
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://mcp_app:${DB_PASSWORD}@db.prod.example.com:5432/mcp_prod?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway&sslmode=require
```

### Multi-Schema Setup

```bash
# Search mcp_gateway first, fall back to shared schema
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+psycopg://user:pass@host:5432/db?options=-c%20search_path=mcp_gateway,shared,public
```

## Security Considerations

1. **Schema Isolation**: Using a custom schema provides logical separation from other applications
2. **Permission Control**: Restrict access to the schema at the database level
3. **Audit Trail**: Schema-level permissions make it easier to audit access
4. **No Public Access**: Eliminates dependency on the `public` schema

## References

- [PostgreSQL search_path Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-schemas.html#DDL-SCHEMAS-PATH)
- [Psycopg3 Connection Options](https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/docs/api/connections.html)
- [GitHub Issue #1535](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1535)

## Support

For issues or questions:

1. Check the troubleshooting section above
2. Review the [GitHub issue](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1535)
3. Open a new issue with details about your setup
