docs/docs/deployment/proxy-auth.md, before:

# Proxy Authentication

This guide explains how to configure MCP Gateway to work with authentication proxies like OAuth2 Proxy, Authelia, Cloudflare Access, or enterprise API gateways.

## Overview

When MCP Gateway is deployed behind an authentication proxy, you can disable its built-in JWT authentication and trust the proxy to handle user authentication. This is common in enterprise environments where authentication is centralized.

## Architecture

```
User → Auth Proxy (OAuth/SAML) → MCP Gateway → MCP Servers
         ↓
    Identity Provider
    (Okta, Auth0, Azure AD)
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

To enable proxy authentication, configure these environment variables:

```bash
# Disable JWT authentication for MCP operations
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false

# REQUIRED: Explicitly trust proxy authentication
# Only set this when MCP Gateway is behind a trusted proxy!
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true

# Header containing the authenticated username from proxy
# Default: X-Authenticated-User
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User

# Keep admin UI authentication enabled (optional)
AUTH_REQUIRED=true
```

### Security Warning

⚠️ **IMPORTANT**: Only disable MCP client authentication when MCP Gateway is deployed behind a trusted authentication proxy. Setting `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false` without `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` will log a warning, as this removes a critical security layer.

## Common Proxy Configurations

### HyprMCP Gateway

Find the completed guide on how to use the [HyprMCP Gateway](https://github.com/hyprmcp/mcp-gateway) to support DCR and OAuth2 here:
[Tutorial: Dynamic Client Registration with HyprMCP](../tutorials/dcr-hyprmcp.md)


```yaml
# docker-compose.yaml
services:
    hyprmcp-dex:
        image: ghcr.io/dexidp/dex:v2.43.1-alpine
        command: ["dex", "serve", "/config.yaml"]
        ports:

            - 5556:5556
            - 5557:5557
        healthcheck:
            test: wget http://localhost:5556/.well-known/openid-configuration -O -
            interval: 5s
            start_period: 10s
            start_interval: 1s
        volumes:

            - type: bind
              source: config/hyprmcp-dex.yaml
              target: /config.yaml
              read_only: true

            - type: bind
              source: ./data
              target: /data
        #env_file:
        #  - config/.dex.secret.env

    hyprmcp-gateway:
        image: ghcr.io/hyprmcp/mcp-gateway:0.2.6
        command: ["serve", "--config", "/opt/config.yaml"]
        ports:

            - 9000:9000
        volumes:

            - type: bind
              source: config/hyprmcp-gateway.yaml
              target: /opt/config.yaml
              read_only: true
        depends_on:
            hyprmcp-dex:
                condition: service_healthy
                required: true
        network_mode: host

    context-forge:
        image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
        ports:

            - 4444:4444
        volumes:

            - type: bind
              source: ./data
              target: /data

            - ./config/public.pem:/opt/public.pem:ro
            - ./config/private.pem:/opt/private.pem:ro
        env_file:

            - config/context-forge.env
        environment:
            JWT_ALGORITHM: RS256
            JWT_PUBLIC_KEY_PATH: /opt/public.pem
            JWT_PRIVATE_KEY_PATH: /opt/private.pem
            JWT_AUDIENCE_VERIFICATION: false
            JWT_ISSUER_VERIFICATION: false
            JWT_ISSUER: http://localhost:5556
            DATABASE_URL: sqlite:////data/context-forge.db
            HOST: 0.0.0.0
            PORT: "4444"
            MCPGATEWAY_UI_ENABLED: true
            MCPGATEWAY_ADMIN_API_ENABLED: true
            BASIC_AUTH_USER: admin
            BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD: changeme
            AUTH_REQUIRED: false
            MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: false
            TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: true
```

### OAuth2 Proxy

OAuth2 Proxy is a popular reverse proxy that provides authentication using OAuth2 providers.

```yaml
# docker-compose.yml
services:
  oauth2-proxy:
    image: quay.io/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy:latest
    ports:

      - "4180:4180"
    environment:
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: your-client-id
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: your-client-secret
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: your-cookie-secret
      OAUTH2_PROXY_UPSTREAMS: http://mcp-gateway:4444
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PASS_USER_HEADERS: true
      OAUTH2_PROXY_SET_XAUTHREQUEST: true

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: false
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: true
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: X-Auth-Request-User
```

### Authelia

Authelia is a complete authentication and authorization server.

```yaml
# Example Authelia forward auth configuration
services:
  authelia:
    image: authelia/authelia
    volumes:

      - ./authelia:/config
    environment:
      TZ: America/New_York

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: false
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: true
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: Remote-User
    labels:

      - "traefik.http.routers.mcp.middlewares=authelia@docker"
```

### Cloudflare Access

For Cloudflare Access, configure the gateway to read the authenticated user from Cloudflare's headers:

```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=Cf-Access-Authenticated-User-Email
```

### AWS API Gateway

When using AWS API Gateway with Lambda authorizers:

```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User
```

Configure your Lambda authorizer to add the authenticated username to the context:

```python
# Lambda authorizer example
def lambda_handler(event, context):
    # Validate token...
    return {
        'principalId': user_id,
        'context': {
            'authenticatedUser': user_email
        }
    }
```

## Header Passthrough

When using proxy authentication, you may want to pass additional headers to downstream MCP servers:

```bash
# Enable header passthrough
ENABLE_HEADER_PASSTHROUGH=true

# Optional: Enable overwriting of base headers (advanced usage)
ENABLE_OVERWRITE_BASE_HEADERS=false

# Headers to pass through (JSON array)
DEFAULT_PASSTHROUGH_HEADERS='["X-Tenant-Id", "X-Request-Id", "X-Authenticated-User"]'
```

## Kubernetes with Istio

In a service mesh with Istio, you can use JWT validation at the mesh level:

```yaml
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: RequestAuthentication
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-auth
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  jwtRules:

  - issuer: "https://your-issuer.com"
    jwksUri: "https://your-issuer.com/.well-known/jwks.json"
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-config
data:
  MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: "false"
  TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: "true"
  PROXY_USER_HEADER: "X-User-Id"
```

## Testing Proxy Authentication

To test your proxy authentication setup:

1. **Without proxy headers (should fail or return anonymous):**
```bash
curl http://localhost:4444/tools
# Returns 401 or anonymous access depending on AUTH_REQUIRED
```

2. **With proxy headers:**
```bash
curl -H "X-Authenticated-User: john.doe@example.com" \
     http://localhost:4444/tools
# Should return tools list for authenticated user
```

3. **WebSocket with proxy auth:**
```javascript
const ws = new WebSocket('ws://localhost:4444/ws', {
  headers: {
    'X-Authenticated-User': 'john.doe@example.com'
  }
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Warning: MCP auth disabled without trust

If you see this warning in logs:
```
WARNING - MCP client authentication is disabled but trust_proxy_auth is not set
```

**Solution**: Set `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` to acknowledge you're using proxy authentication.

### Authentication still required

**Problem**: Getting 401 errors even with proxy headers.

**Check**:

1. Verify `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false`
2. Ensure `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true`
3. Confirm header name matches `PROXY_USER_HEADER`
4. Check proxy is actually sending the header

### WebSocket connections fail

**Problem**: WebSocket connections are rejected.

**Solution**: Ensure your proxy passes headers to WebSocket upgrade requests. Some proxies require special configuration for WebSocket support.

## Migration from JWT Authentication

To migrate from JWT to proxy authentication:

1. **Deploy proxy** alongside existing setup
2. **Test proxy** authentication with a subset of users
3. **Update environment**:
   ```bash
   MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
   TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
   PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User
   ```
4. **Monitor logs** for authentication issues
5. **Remove JWT** token generation once stable

## Security Best Practices

1. **Never expose MCP Gateway directly** when proxy auth is enabled
2. **Use TLS** between proxy and gateway
3. **Validate proxy certificates** in production
4. **Monitor** authentication logs for anomalies
5. **Implement rate limiting** at the proxy level
6. **Use network policies** to ensure only the proxy can reach the gateway

## Example: Complete Setup with Traefik

```yaml
# docker-compose.yml
version: '3.8'

services:
  traefik:
    image: traefik:v2.10
    command:

      - "--providers.docker=true"
      - "--entrypoints.web.address=:80"
    ports:

      - "80:80"
    volumes:

      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

  oauth2-proxy:
    image: quay.io/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy:latest
    environment:
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: ${CLIENT_ID}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: ${CLIENT_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${COOKIE_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PROVIDER: google
      OAUTH2_PROXY_EMAIL_DOMAINS: "*"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_UPSTREAMS: "http://mcp-gateway:4444/"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_HTTP_ADDRESS: "0.0.0.0:4180"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PASS_USER_HEADERS: "true"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_SET_XAUTHREQUEST: "true"
    labels:

      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.http.routers.oauth2-proxy.rule=Host(`mcp.example.com`)"
      - "traefik.http.services.oauth2-proxy.loadbalancer.server.port=4180"

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/contingentai/mcp-gateway:latest
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: "false"
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: "true"
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: "X-Auth-Request-Email"
      AUTH_REQUIRED: "true"  # Keep admin UI protected
      BASIC_AUTH_USER: ${ADMIN_USER}
      BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD: ${ADMIN_PASSWORD}
    volumes:

      - ./data:/data
```

This configuration provides Google OAuth authentication for all MCP Gateway endpoints while maintaining separate admin UI authentication.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/deployment/proxy-auth.md, after:

# Proxy Authentication

This guide explains how to configure ContextForge to work with authentication proxies like OAuth2 Proxy, Authelia, Cloudflare Access, or enterprise API gateways.

## Overview

When ContextForge is deployed behind an authentication proxy, you can disable its built-in JWT authentication and trust the proxy to handle user authentication. This is common in enterprise environments where authentication is centralized.

## Architecture

```
User → Auth Proxy (OAuth/SAML) → ContextForge → MCP Servers
         ↓
    Identity Provider
    (Okta, Auth0, Azure AD)
```

## Configuration

### Environment Variables

To enable proxy authentication, configure these environment variables:

```bash
# Disable JWT authentication for MCP operations
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false

# REQUIRED: Explicitly trust proxy authentication
# Only set this when ContextForge is behind a trusted proxy!
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true

# Header containing the authenticated username from proxy
# Default: X-Authenticated-User
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User

# Keep admin UI authentication enabled (optional)
AUTH_REQUIRED=true
```

### Security Warning

⚠️ **IMPORTANT**: Only disable MCP client authentication when ContextForge is deployed behind a trusted authentication proxy. Setting `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false` without `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` will log a warning, as this removes a critical security layer.

## Common Proxy Configurations

### HyprContextForge

Find the completed guide on how to use the [HyprContextForge](https://github.com/hyprmcp/mcp-gateway) to support DCR and OAuth2 here:
[Tutorial: Dynamic Client Registration with HyprMCP](../tutorials/dcr-hyprmcp.md)


```yaml
# docker-compose.yaml
services:
    hyprmcp-dex:
        image: ghcr.io/dexidp/dex:v2.43.1-alpine
        command: ["dex", "serve", "/config.yaml"]
        ports:

            - 5556:5556
            - 5557:5557
        healthcheck:
            test: wget http://localhost:5556/.well-known/openid-configuration -O -
            interval: 5s
            start_period: 10s
            start_interval: 1s
        volumes:

            - type: bind
              source: config/hyprmcp-dex.yaml
              target: /config.yaml
              read_only: true

            - type: bind
              source: ./data
              target: /data
        #env_file:
        #  - config/.dex.secret.env

    hyprmcp-gateway:
        image: ghcr.io/hyprmcp/mcp-gateway:0.2.6
        command: ["serve", "--config", "/opt/config.yaml"]
        ports:

            - 9000:9000
        volumes:

            - type: bind
              source: config/hyprmcp-gateway.yaml
              target: /opt/config.yaml
              read_only: true
        depends_on:
            hyprmcp-dex:
                condition: service_healthy
                required: true
        network_mode: host

    context-forge:
        image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
        ports:

            - 4444:4444
        volumes:

            - type: bind
              source: ./data
              target: /data

            - ./config/public.pem:/opt/public.pem:ro
            - ./config/private.pem:/opt/private.pem:ro
        env_file:

            - config/context-forge.env
        environment:
            JWT_ALGORITHM: RS256
            JWT_PUBLIC_KEY_PATH: /opt/public.pem
            JWT_PRIVATE_KEY_PATH: /opt/private.pem
            JWT_AUDIENCE_VERIFICATION: false
            JWT_ISSUER_VERIFICATION: false
            JWT_ISSUER: http://localhost:5556
            DATABASE_URL: sqlite:////data/context-forge.db
            HOST: 0.0.0.0
            PORT: "4444"
            MCPGATEWAY_UI_ENABLED: true
            MCPGATEWAY_ADMIN_API_ENABLED: true
            BASIC_AUTH_USER: admin
            BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD: changeme
            AUTH_REQUIRED: false
            MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: false
            TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: true
```

### OAuth2 Proxy

OAuth2 Proxy is a popular reverse proxy that provides authentication using OAuth2 providers.

```yaml
# docker-compose.yml
services:
  oauth2-proxy:
    image: quay.io/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy:latest
    ports:

      - "4180:4180"
    environment:
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: your-client-id
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: your-client-secret
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: your-cookie-secret
      OAUTH2_PROXY_UPSTREAMS: http://mcp-gateway:4444
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PASS_USER_HEADERS: true
      OAUTH2_PROXY_SET_XAUTHREQUEST: true

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: false
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: true
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: X-Auth-Request-User
```

### Authelia

Authelia is a complete authentication and authorization server.

```yaml
# Example Authelia forward auth configuration
services:
  authelia:
    image: authelia/authelia
    volumes:

      - ./authelia:/config
    environment:
      TZ: America/New_York

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: false
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: true
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: Remote-User
    labels:

      - "traefik.http.routers.mcp.middlewares=authelia@docker"
```

### Cloudflare Access

For Cloudflare Access, configure the gateway to read the authenticated user from Cloudflare's headers:

```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=Cf-Access-Authenticated-User-Email
```

### AWS API Gateway

When using AWS API Gateway with Lambda authorizers:

```bash
MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User
```

Configure your Lambda authorizer to add the authenticated username to the context:

```python
# Lambda authorizer example
def lambda_handler(event, context):
    # Validate token...
    return {
        'principalId': user_id,
        'context': {
            'authenticatedUser': user_email
        }
    }
```

## Header Passthrough

When using proxy authentication, you may want to pass additional headers to downstream MCP servers:

```bash
# Enable header passthrough
ENABLE_HEADER_PASSTHROUGH=true

# Optional: Enable overwriting of base headers (advanced usage)
ENABLE_OVERWRITE_BASE_HEADERS=false

# Headers to pass through (JSON array)
DEFAULT_PASSTHROUGH_HEADERS='["X-Tenant-Id", "X-Request-Id", "X-Authenticated-User"]'
```

## Kubernetes with Istio

In a service mesh with Istio, you can use JWT validation at the mesh level:

```yaml
apiVersion: security.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: RequestAuthentication
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-auth
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-gateway
  jwtRules:

  - issuer: "https://your-issuer.com"
    jwksUri: "https://your-issuer.com/.well-known/jwks.json"
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway-config
data:
  MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: "false"
  TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: "true"
  PROXY_USER_HEADER: "X-User-Id"
```

## Testing Proxy Authentication

To test your proxy authentication setup:

1. **Without proxy headers (should fail or return anonymous):**
```bash
curl http://localhost:4444/tools
# Returns 401 or anonymous access depending on AUTH_REQUIRED
```

2. **With proxy headers:**
```bash
curl -H "X-Authenticated-User: john.doe@example.com" \
     http://localhost:4444/tools
# Should return tools list for authenticated user
```

3. **WebSocket with proxy auth:**
```javascript
const ws = new WebSocket('ws://localhost:4444/ws', {
  headers: {
    'X-Authenticated-User': 'john.doe@example.com'
  }
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Warning: MCP auth disabled without trust

If you see this warning in logs:
```
WARNING - MCP client authentication is disabled but trust_proxy_auth is not set
```

**Solution**: Set `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true` to acknowledge you're using proxy authentication.

### Authentication still required

**Problem**: Getting 401 errors even with proxy headers.

**Check**:

1. Verify `MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false`
2. Ensure `TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true`
3. Confirm header name matches `PROXY_USER_HEADER`
4. Check proxy is actually sending the header

### WebSocket connections fail

**Problem**: WebSocket connections are rejected.

**Solution**: Ensure your proxy passes headers to WebSocket upgrade requests. Some proxies require special configuration for WebSocket support.

## Migration from JWT Authentication

To migrate from JWT to proxy authentication:

1. **Deploy proxy** alongside existing setup
2. **Test proxy** authentication with a subset of users
3. **Update environment**:
   ```bash
   MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED=false
   TRUST_PROXY_AUTH=true
   PROXY_USER_HEADER=X-Authenticated-User
   ```
4. **Monitor logs** for authentication issues
5. **Remove JWT** token generation once stable

## Security Best Practices

1. **Never expose ContextForge directly** when proxy auth is enabled
2. **Use TLS** between proxy and gateway
3. **Validate proxy certificates** in production
4. **Monitor** authentication logs for anomalies
5. **Implement rate limiting** at the proxy level
6. **Use network policies** to ensure only the proxy can reach the gateway

## Example: Complete Setup with Traefik

```yaml
# docker-compose.yml
version: '3.8'

services:
  traefik:
    image: traefik:v2.10
    command:

      - "--providers.docker=true"
      - "--entrypoints.web.address=:80"
    ports:

      - "80:80"
    volumes:

      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

  oauth2-proxy:
    image: quay.io/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy:latest
    environment:
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_ID: ${CLIENT_ID}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_CLIENT_SECRET: ${CLIENT_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_COOKIE_SECRET: ${COOKIE_SECRET}
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PROVIDER: google
      OAUTH2_PROXY_EMAIL_DOMAINS: "*"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_UPSTREAMS: "http://mcp-gateway:4444/"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_HTTP_ADDRESS: "0.0.0.0:4180"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_PASS_USER_HEADERS: "true"
      OAUTH2_PROXY_SET_XAUTHREQUEST: "true"
    labels:

      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.http.routers.oauth2-proxy.rule=Host(`mcp.example.com`)"
      - "traefik.http.services.oauth2-proxy.loadbalancer.server.port=4180"

  mcp-gateway:
    image: ghcr.io/contingentai/mcp-gateway:latest
    environment:
      MCP_CLIENT_AUTH_ENABLED: "false"
      TRUST_PROXY_AUTH: "true"
      PROXY_USER_HEADER: "X-Auth-Request-Email"
      AUTH_REQUIRED: "true"  # Keep admin UI protected
      BASIC_AUTH_USER: ${ADMIN_USER}
      BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD: ${ADMIN_PASSWORD}
    volumes:

      - ./data:/data
```

This configuration provides Google OAuth authentication for all ContextForge endpoints while maintaining separate admin UI authentication.
