tests/client/README.md, before:

# HTTPX Client Benchmarks

Benchmark suite for testing HTTPX client performance patterns, connection pooling,
and optimal configuration for high-concurrency MCP Gateway deployments.

## Overview

These benchmarks help determine:

1. **Optimal connection pool settings** for your workload
2. **Performance difference** between per-request vs shared clients
3. **Concurrency sweet spots** for maximum throughput
4. **HTTP/2 benefits** (or lack thereof) for your use case

## Quick Start

```bash
# Start a test server (e.g., fast-time-server)
./fast-time-server -transport=dual -port 8101

# Run a quick benchmark
make benchmark

# Run comprehensive sweep
make sweep

# Run with custom settings
make benchmark URL=http://localhost:8101/health DURATION=60 CONCURRENCY=500
```

## Benchmark Scripts

### `benchmark_httpx.py` - Single Pattern Benchmark

Run a specific benchmark pattern with configurable parameters.

```bash
# Basic usage
python benchmark_httpx.py --url http://localhost:8101/health

# High concurrency test
python benchmark_httpx.py --url http://localhost:8101/health \
    --duration 120 \
    --concurrency 1000 \
    --max-connections 500

# Run all patterns
python benchmark_httpx.py --pattern all --duration 30

# JSON output
python benchmark_httpx.py --output json
```

**Available Patterns:**

| Pattern | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `per_request` | Creates new httpx.AsyncClient per request (anti-pattern) |
| `shared_no_limits` | Shared client without httpx.Limits |
| `shared_with_limits` | Shared client with configurable Limits (recommended) |
| `http2` | HTTP/2 with shared client and Limits |
| `all` | Run all patterns for comparison |

### `benchmark_sweep.py` - Concurrency Sweep

Automatically tests multiple concurrency/connection combinations to find optimal settings.

```bash
# Default sweep (10 levels, ~5 minutes)
python benchmark_sweep.py --url http://localhost:8101/health

# Quick sweep (3 levels)
python benchmark_sweep.py --quick

# Custom levels
python benchmark_sweep.py --levels "100:100,500:200,1000:500"

# Save results
python benchmark_sweep.py --output results.csv
python benchmark_sweep.py --output results.json
```

**Default Sweep Levels:**

| Concurrency | Max Connections |
|-------------|-----------------|
| 10 | 50 |
| 50 | 100 |
| 100 | 100 |
| 200 | 200 |
| 500 | 200 |
| 500 | 500 |
| 1000 | 500 |
| 1000 | 1000 |
| 2000 | 1000 |
| 3000 | 1000 |

## Environment Variables

All scripts support configuration via environment variables:

```bash
export BENCHMARK_URL=http://localhost:8101/health
export BENCHMARK_DURATION=30
export BENCHMARK_CONCURRENCY=100
export BENCHMARK_MAX_CONNECTIONS=100
export BENCHMARK_MAX_KEEPALIVE=50
```

## Makefile Targets

```bash
make benchmark          # Run single benchmark with defaults
make sweep              # Run concurrency sweep
make sweep-quick        # Quick 3-level sweep
make benchmark-all      # Run all patterns
make benchmark-json     # Output results as JSON
make help               # Show all targets
```

## Sample Results

### Benchmark Output

```
================================================================================
RESULT: shared_c500_l200
================================================================================
  Total Requests:      84,976
  Successful:          84,976
  Failed:              0
  Duration:            121.26s
  Throughput:          700.8 req/s
  Avg Latency:         709.82ms
  P50 Latency:         393.14ms
  P95 Latency:         1790.87ms
  P99 Latency:         6779.09ms
  Max Latency:         32687.63ms
```

### Sweep Summary

```
================================================================================
CONCURRENCY SWEEP RESULTS
================================================================================
Pattern                              Requests          RPS    Avg(ms)    P50(ms)    P99(ms)    Max(ms)   Success%
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
shared_c100_l100                       45,231       1,507.7       6.51       5.12      15.23      89.12     100.0%
shared_c500_l200                       84,976         700.8     709.82     393.14    6779.09   32687.63     100.0%
shared_c1000_l500                      59,282         464.3    2109.22    1128.15   31836.61   44382.89     100.0%
shared_c3000_l1000                     40,812         252.0    9835.22    6518.99   48333.05  100931.56     100.0%

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BEST: shared_c100_l100 with 1,507.7 RPS
```

## Key Findings

Based on extensive benchmarking:

1. **Per-request client is ~20x slower** than shared pooled client
2. **Optimal concurrency != maximum concurrency**
   - c=500/l=200 achieved 700 RPS
   - c=3000/l=1000 only achieved 252 RPS
3. **HTTP/2 provides minimal benefit** for localhost connections
4. **P99 latency explodes at high concurrency**: 6.8s at c=500 → 48s at c=3000

## Recommended Configuration

Based on benchmarks, for MCP Gateway:

```bash
# Optimal for high-throughput
HTTPX_MAX_CONNECTIONS=200
HTTPX_MAX_KEEPALIVE_CONNECTIONS=100
HTTPX_KEEPALIVE_EXPIRY=30.0
HTTPX_CONNECT_TIMEOUT=5.0
HTTPX_READ_TIMEOUT=120.0  # High for slow MCP tool calls
HTTPX_POOL_TIMEOUT=10.0   # Fail fast on pool exhaustion
```

### Tuning Guidelines

| Expected Load | max_connections | max_keepalive | Expected RPS |
|---------------|-----------------|---------------|--------------|
| Low (10-50) | 100 | 50 | ~1,500+ |
| Medium (50-200) | 200 | 100 | ~700-1,500 |
| High (200-500) | 300 | 150 | ~500-700 |
| Very High (500+) | 500 | 250 | ~300-500 |

## Integration with CI/CD

```yaml
# Example GitHub Actions workflow
- name: Run HTTPX Benchmarks
  run: |
    cd tests/client
    make benchmark-json > benchmark-results.json

- name: Upload Results
  uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
  with:
    name: benchmark-results
    path: tests/client/benchmark-results.json
```

## Troubleshooting

### "Cannot connect to URL"

Ensure your test server is running:

```bash
# Start fast-time-server
./fast-time-server -transport=dual -port 8101

# Or start MCP Gateway
make dev
```

### High Error Rate

Check for:
- File descriptor limits: `ulimit -n`
- System connection limits: `sysctl net.core.somaxconn`
- Target server capacity

### Slow Per-Request Pattern

This is expected! The per-request pattern is intentionally slow to demonstrate
the anti-pattern. Limit concurrency to avoid system overload:

```bash
python benchmark_httpx.py --pattern per_request --concurrency 50
```

## Related Documentation

- [Issue #1897](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1897) - MCP client connection exhaustion
- [todo/configurable-httpx.md](../../todo/configurable-httpx.md) - Full analysis and solution proposal
- [HTTPX Connection Pooling](https://www.python-httpx.org/advanced/#pool-limits)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

tests/client/README.md, after:

# HTTPX Client Benchmarks

Benchmark suite for testing HTTPX client performance patterns, connection pooling,
and optimal configuration for high-concurrency ContextForge deployments.

## Overview

These benchmarks help determine:

1. **Optimal connection pool settings** for your workload
2. **Performance difference** between per-request vs shared clients
3. **Concurrency sweet spots** for maximum throughput
4. **HTTP/2 benefits** (or lack thereof) for your use case

## Quick Start

```bash
# Start a test server (e.g., fast-time-server)
./fast-time-server -transport=dual -port 8101

# Run a quick benchmark
make benchmark

# Run comprehensive sweep
make sweep

# Run with custom settings
make benchmark URL=http://localhost:8101/health DURATION=60 CONCURRENCY=500
```

## Benchmark Scripts

### `benchmark_httpx.py` - Single Pattern Benchmark

Run a specific benchmark pattern with configurable parameters.

```bash
# Basic usage
python benchmark_httpx.py --url http://localhost:8101/health

# High concurrency test
python benchmark_httpx.py --url http://localhost:8101/health \
    --duration 120 \
    --concurrency 1000 \
    --max-connections 500

# Run all patterns
python benchmark_httpx.py --pattern all --duration 30

# JSON output
python benchmark_httpx.py --output json
```

**Available Patterns:**

| Pattern | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `per_request` | Creates new httpx.AsyncClient per request (anti-pattern) |
| `shared_no_limits` | Shared client without httpx.Limits |
| `shared_with_limits` | Shared client with configurable Limits (recommended) |
| `http2` | HTTP/2 with shared client and Limits |
| `all` | Run all patterns for comparison |

### `benchmark_sweep.py` - Concurrency Sweep

Automatically tests multiple concurrency/connection combinations to find optimal settings.

```bash
# Default sweep (10 levels, ~5 minutes)
python benchmark_sweep.py --url http://localhost:8101/health

# Quick sweep (3 levels)
python benchmark_sweep.py --quick

# Custom levels
python benchmark_sweep.py --levels "100:100,500:200,1000:500"

# Save results
python benchmark_sweep.py --output results.csv
python benchmark_sweep.py --output results.json
```

**Default Sweep Levels:**

| Concurrency | Max Connections |
|-------------|-----------------|
| 10 | 50 |
| 50 | 100 |
| 100 | 100 |
| 200 | 200 |
| 500 | 200 |
| 500 | 500 |
| 1000 | 500 |
| 1000 | 1000 |
| 2000 | 1000 |
| 3000 | 1000 |

## Environment Variables

All scripts support configuration via environment variables:

```bash
export BENCHMARK_URL=http://localhost:8101/health
export BENCHMARK_DURATION=30
export BENCHMARK_CONCURRENCY=100
export BENCHMARK_MAX_CONNECTIONS=100
export BENCHMARK_MAX_KEEPALIVE=50
```

## Makefile Targets

```bash
make benchmark          # Run single benchmark with defaults
make sweep              # Run concurrency sweep
make sweep-quick        # Quick 3-level sweep
make benchmark-all      # Run all patterns
make benchmark-json     # Output results as JSON
make help               # Show all targets
```

## Sample Results

### Benchmark Output

```
================================================================================
RESULT: shared_c500_l200
================================================================================
  Total Requests:      84,976
  Successful:          84,976
  Failed:              0
  Duration:            121.26s
  Throughput:          700.8 req/s
  Avg Latency:         709.82ms
  P50 Latency:         393.14ms
  P95 Latency:         1790.87ms
  P99 Latency:         6779.09ms
  Max Latency:         32687.63ms
```

### Sweep Summary

```
================================================================================
CONCURRENCY SWEEP RESULTS
================================================================================
Pattern                              Requests          RPS    Avg(ms)    P50(ms)    P99(ms)    Max(ms)   Success%
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
shared_c100_l100                       45,231       1,507.7       6.51       5.12      15.23      89.12     100.0%
shared_c500_l200                       84,976         700.8     709.82     393.14    6779.09   32687.63     100.0%
shared_c1000_l500                      59,282         464.3    2109.22    1128.15   31836.61   44382.89     100.0%
shared_c3000_l1000                     40,812         252.0    9835.22    6518.99   48333.05  100931.56     100.0%

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BEST: shared_c100_l100 with 1,507.7 RPS
```

## Key Findings

Based on extensive benchmarking:

1. **Per-request client is ~20x slower** than shared pooled client
2. **Optimal concurrency != maximum concurrency**
   - c=500/l=200 achieved 700 RPS
   - c=3000/l=1000 only achieved 252 RPS
3. **HTTP/2 provides minimal benefit** for localhost connections
4. **P99 latency explodes at high concurrency**: 6.8s at c=500 → 48s at c=3000

## Recommended Configuration

Based on benchmarks, for ContextForge:

```bash
# Optimal for high-throughput
HTTPX_MAX_CONNECTIONS=200
HTTPX_MAX_KEEPALIVE_CONNECTIONS=100
HTTPX_KEEPALIVE_EXPIRY=30.0
HTTPX_CONNECT_TIMEOUT=5.0
HTTPX_READ_TIMEOUT=120.0  # High for slow MCP tool calls
HTTPX_POOL_TIMEOUT=10.0   # Fail fast on pool exhaustion
```

### Tuning Guidelines

| Expected Load | max_connections | max_keepalive | Expected RPS |
|---------------|-----------------|---------------|--------------|
| Low (10-50) | 100 | 50 | ~1,500+ |
| Medium (50-200) | 200 | 100 | ~700-1,500 |
| High (200-500) | 300 | 150 | ~500-700 |
| Very High (500+) | 500 | 250 | ~300-500 |

## Integration with CI/CD

```yaml
# Example GitHub Actions workflow
- name: Run HTTPX Benchmarks
  run: |
    cd tests/client
    make benchmark-json > benchmark-results.json

- name: Upload Results
  uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
  with:
    name: benchmark-results
    path: tests/client/benchmark-results.json
```

## Troubleshooting

### "Cannot connect to URL"

Ensure your test server is running:

```bash
# Start fast-time-server
./fast-time-server -transport=dual -port 8101

# Or start ContextForge
make dev
```

### High Error Rate

Check for:
- File descriptor limits: `ulimit -n`
- System connection limits: `sysctl net.core.somaxconn`
- Target server capacity

### Slow Per-Request Pattern

This is expected! The per-request pattern is intentionally slow to demonstrate
the anti-pattern. Limit concurrency to avoid system overload:

```bash
python benchmark_httpx.py --pattern per_request --concurrency 50
```

## Related Documentation

- [Issue #1897](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/issues/1897) - MCP client connection exhaustion
- [todo/configurable-httpx.md](../../todo/configurable-httpx.md) - Full analysis and solution proposal
- [HTTPX Connection Pooling](https://www.python-httpx.org/advanced/#pool-limits)
