docs/docs/manage/observability/observability.md, before:

# Observability

MCP Gateway includes production-grade OpenTelemetry instrumentation for distributed tracing, enabling you to monitor performance, debug issues, and understand request flows across your gateway instances.

## Overview

The observability implementation is **vendor-agnostic** and works with any OTLP-compatible backend. MCP Gateway supports multiple observability backends, each optimized for different use cases.

## Recommended Backend Options

### Arize Phoenix - AI/LLM-Focused Observability

**Best for**: AI applications, LLM debugging, and prompt optimization

[Arize Phoenix](https://github.com/Arize-ai/phoenix) is an open-source AI observability platform specifically designed for LLM applications and AI systems. Built on OpenTelemetry, it provides specialized features for understanding AI application behavior.

**Key Features**:

- **LLM Tracing**: Purpose-built for tracking LLM calls, token usage, and model performance
- **Evaluation Tools**: Built-in evaluators for response quality, retrieval accuracy, and hallucination detection
- **Prompt Playground**: Interactive environment for optimizing prompts with version control and experimentation
- **Framework Support**: Native integrations with LlamaIndex, LangChain, Haystack, DSPy, and major LLM providers
- **Cost Tracking**: Monitor token usage and API costs across different providers
- **Zero Lock-in**: Fully open source and self-hostable with no feature gates

**Ideal Use Cases**:

- Debugging RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) pipelines
- Optimizing prompt templates and model parameters
- Tracking LLM performance metrics and costs
- Evaluating response quality and accuracy

**Transport**: Uses OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol) via gRPC

### Jaeger - Production-Grade Distributed Tracing

**Best for**: Microservices architectures, production deployments, and general-purpose tracing

[Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) is a mature, battle-tested distributed tracing platform originally created by Uber and now a CNCF graduated project. It excels at monitoring complex distributed systems.

**Key Features**:

- **Proven Scale**: Handles high-volume production environments with battle-tested reliability
- **Full Observability**: Comprehensive request flow visualization across microservices
- **Multiple Storage Backends**: Supports Elasticsearch, Cassandra, and other scalable storage solutions
- **Kubernetes Native**: Deep integration with cloud-native environments
- **Advanced Sampling**: Configurable sampling strategies (constant, probabilistic, rate-limiting)
- **OpenTelemetry Integration**: Full OTLP support in v2 with native OpenTelemetry data model

**Ideal Use Cases**:

- Large-scale microservices deployments
- Performance bottleneck identification
- Service dependency mapping
- Root cause analysis of distributed failures

**Transport**: Supports both native Jaeger protocol and OTLP

### Grafana Tempo - Cost-Efficient High-Scale Tracing

**Best for**: High-volume environments, cost-conscious deployments, and Grafana ecosystem users

[Grafana Tempo](https://grafana.com/oss/tempo/) is a high-scale, low-cost distributed tracing backend that eliminates expensive indexing by leveraging object storage (S3, GCS, Azure Blob).

**Key Features**:

- **Extreme Cost Efficiency**: Uses cheap object storage instead of expensive databases (Elasticsearch/Cassandra)
- **Massive Scale**: Designed to handle 100% trace capture without prohibitive costs
- **No Heavy Indexing**: Lightweight bloom filters instead of full-text indexes reduce storage costs dramatically
- **TraceQL Query Language**: Powerful query language inspired by PromQL and LogQL
- **Grafana Ecosystem Integration**: Deep integration with Grafana, Prometheus, Loki, and Mimir
- **Multi-Protocol Support**: Compatible with Jaeger, Zipkin, OpenCensus, and OpenTelemetry

**Ideal Use Cases**:

- High-volume microservices (170k+ spans/second proven in production)
- Cost-sensitive environments requiring long trace retention
- Organizations already using Grafana stack
- Teams wanting 100% trace capture without sampling

**Transport**: Uses OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol) via gRPC

### Other Compatible Backends

The OTLP exporter also works with commercial APM solutions:

- **Datadog APM** - Full-featured commercial observability platform
- **New Relic** - Cloud-based application performance monitoring
- **Honeycomb** - Observability for production systems
- **Zipkin** - Lightweight distributed tracing (legacy but widely supported)

## What Gets Traced

- **Tool invocations** - Full lifecycle with arguments, results, and timing
- **Prompt rendering** - Template processing and message generation
- **Resource fetching** - URI resolution, caching, and content retrieval
- **Gateway federation** - Cross-gateway requests and health checks
- **Plugin execution** - Pre/post hooks if plugins are enabled
- **Errors and exceptions** - Full stack traces and error context

## Quick Start

### 1. Install Dependencies

The observability packages are included in the Docker containers by default. For local development:

```bash
# Install base gateway with core observability support
pip install mcp-contextforge-gateway[observability]
```

**Important**: Only one exporter backend should be installed at a time - they are mutually exclusive. Install the specific backend package based on your chosen observability platform (see backend-specific instructions in the "Start Your Backend" section below).

### 2. Configure Environment

Set these environment variables (or add to `.env`):

```bash
# Enable observability (default: false)
export OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY=true

# Service identification
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway
export OTEL_SERVICE_VERSION=1.0.0-RC-1
export OTEL_DEPLOYMENT_ENVIRONMENT=development

# Choose your backend (otlp, jaeger, zipkin, console, none)
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp

# OTLP Configuration (for Phoenix, Tempo, etc.)
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:4317
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL=grpc
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE=true
```

### 3. Start Your Backend

Choose your preferred observability backend:

#### Phoenix (AI/LLM Focus)

```bash
# Install Phoenix exporter backend
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-grpc

# Start Phoenix
docker run -d \
  --name phoenix \
  -p 6006:6006 \
  -p 4317:4317 \
  arizephoenix/phoenix:latest

# Configure environment
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:4317
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway

# View UI at http://localhost:6006
```

#### Jaeger

```bash
# Install Jaeger exporter backend
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-jaeger

# Start Jaeger
docker run -d \
  --name jaeger \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 14268:14268 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one

# Configure environment
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=jaeger
export OTEL_EXPORTER_JAEGER_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:14268/api/traces
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway

# View UI at http://localhost:16686
```

#### Zipkin

```bash
# Install Zipkin exporter backend
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-zipkin

# Start Zipkin
docker run -d \
  --name zipkin \
  -p 9411:9411 \
  openzipkin/zipkin

# Configure environment
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=zipkin
export OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway

# View UI at http://localhost:9411
```

#### Grafana Tempo

```bash
# Install OTLP exporter backend (Tempo uses OTLP)
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-grpc

# Start Tempo
docker run -d \
  --name tempo \
  -p 4317:4317 \
  -p 3200:3200 \
  grafana/tempo:latest

# Configure environment (uses OTLP)
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:4317
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway
```

#### Console (Development)

```bash
# For debugging - prints traces to stdout
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=console
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway
```

### 4. Run MCP Gateway

```bash
# Start the gateway (observability is disabled by default)
mcpgateway

# Or with Docker
docker run -e OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY=true \
           -e OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://host.docker.internal:4317 \
           ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
```

## Configuration Reference

### Core Settings

| Variable | Description | Default | Options |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY` | Master switch | `false` | `true`, `false` |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME` | Service identifier | `mcp-gateway` | Any string |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_VERSION` | Service version | `1.0.0-RC-1` | Any string |
| `OTEL_DEPLOYMENT_ENVIRONMENT` | Environment tag | `development` | `development`, `staging`, `production` |
| `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER` | Export backend | `otlp` | `otlp`, `jaeger`, `zipkin`, `console`, `none` |
| `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` | Custom attributes | - | `key=value,key2=value2` |

### OTLP Configuration

| Variable | Description | Default | Example |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` | Collector endpoint | - | `http://localhost:4317` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL` | Protocol | `grpc` | `grpc`, `http/protobuf` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS` | Auth headers | - | `api-key=secret,x-auth=token` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE` | Skip TLS verify | `true` | `true`, `false` |

### Alternative Backends

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_JAEGER_ENDPOINT` | Jaeger collector | `http://localhost:14268/api/traces` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT` | Zipkin collector | `http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans` |

### Performance Tuning

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER` | Sampling strategy | `parentbased_traceidratio` |
| `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG` | Sample rate (0.0-1.0) | `0.1` (10%) |
| `OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE` | Max queued spans | `2048` |
| `OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE` | Batch size | `512` |
| `OTEL_BSP_SCHEDULE_DELAY` | Export interval (ms) | `5000` |

## Understanding Traces

### Span Attributes

Each span includes standard attributes:

- **Operation name** - e.g., `tool.invoke`, `prompt.render`, `resource.read`
- **Service info** - Service name, version, environment
- **User context** - User ID, tenant ID, request ID
- **Timing** - Start time, duration, end time
- **Status** - Success/error status with error details

### Tool Invocation Spans

```json
{
  "name": "tool.invoke",
  "attributes": {
    "tool.name": "github_search",
    "tool.id": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716",
    "tool.integration_type": "REST",
    "arguments_count": 3,
    "success": true,
    "duration.ms": 234.5,
    "http.status_code": 200
  }
}
```

### Error Tracking

Failed operations include:

- `error`: `true`
- `error.type`: Exception class name
- `error.message`: Error description
- Full stack trace via `span.record_exception()`

## Production Deployment

### Docker Compose

Use the provided compose files:

```bash
# Start MCP Gateway with Phoenix observability
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml \
               -f docker-compose.with-phoenix.yml up -d
```

### Kubernetes

Add environment variables to your deployment:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:

      - name: gateway
        image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
        env:

        - name: OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY
          value: "true"

        - name: OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER
          value: "otlp"

        - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
          value: "http://otel-collector:4317"

        - name: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
          valueFrom:
            fieldRef:
              fieldPath: metadata.labels['app.kubernetes.io/name']
```

### Sampling Strategies

For production, adjust sampling to balance visibility and performance:

```bash
# Sample 1% of traces
export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER=parentbased_traceidratio
export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG=0.01

# Always sample errors (coming in future update)
# export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER=parentbased_always_on_errors
```

## Testing Your Setup

### Generate Test Traces

Use the trace generator helper to verify your observability backend is working:

```bash
# Activate virtual environment if needed
. /home/cmihai/.venv/mcpgateway/bin/activate

# Run the trace generator
python tests/integration/helpers/trace_generator.py
```

This will send sample traces for:

- Tool invocations
- Prompt rendering
- Resource fetching
- Gateway federation
- Complex workflows with nested spans

## Troubleshooting

### No Traces Appearing

1. Check observability is enabled:

   ```bash
   echo $OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY  # Should be "true"
   ```

2. Verify endpoint is reachable:

   ```bash
   curl -v http://localhost:4317  # Should connect
   ```

3. Use console exporter for debugging:

   ```bash
   export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=console
   mcpgateway  # Traces will print to stdout
   ```

### High Memory Usage

Reduce batch size and queue limits:

```bash
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE=512
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE=128
```

### Missing Spans

Check sampling rate:

```bash
# Temporarily disable sampling
export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER=always_on
```

## Performance Impact

- **When disabled**: Zero overhead (no-op context managers)
- **When enabled**: ~0.1-0.5ms per span
- **Memory**: ~50MB for typical workload
- **Network**: Batched exports every 5 seconds

## Next Steps

- See [Phoenix Integration Guide](phoenix.md) for AI/LLM-specific features
- Review [OpenTelemetry Best Practices](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/best-practices/)
- Configure dashboards in your APM solution
- Set up alerting based on error rates and latencies

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/manage/observability/observability.md, after:

# Observability

ContextForge includes production-grade OpenTelemetry instrumentation for distributed tracing, enabling you to monitor performance, debug issues, and understand request flows across your gateway instances.

## Overview

The observability implementation is **vendor-agnostic** and works with any OTLP-compatible backend. ContextForge supports multiple observability backends, each optimized for different use cases.

## Recommended Backend Options

### Arize Phoenix - AI/LLM-Focused Observability

**Best for**: AI applications, LLM debugging, and prompt optimization

[Arize Phoenix](https://github.com/Arize-ai/phoenix) is an open-source AI observability platform specifically designed for LLM applications and AI systems. Built on OpenTelemetry, it provides specialized features for understanding AI application behavior.

**Key Features**:

- **LLM Tracing**: Purpose-built for tracking LLM calls, token usage, and model performance
- **Evaluation Tools**: Built-in evaluators for response quality, retrieval accuracy, and hallucination detection
- **Prompt Playground**: Interactive environment for optimizing prompts with version control and experimentation
- **Framework Support**: Native integrations with LlamaIndex, LangChain, Haystack, DSPy, and major LLM providers
- **Cost Tracking**: Monitor token usage and API costs across different providers
- **Zero Lock-in**: Fully open source and self-hostable with no feature gates

**Ideal Use Cases**:

- Debugging RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) pipelines
- Optimizing prompt templates and model parameters
- Tracking LLM performance metrics and costs
- Evaluating response quality and accuracy

**Transport**: Uses OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol) via gRPC

### Jaeger - Production-Grade Distributed Tracing

**Best for**: Microservices architectures, production deployments, and general-purpose tracing

[Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) is a mature, battle-tested distributed tracing platform originally created by Uber and now a CNCF graduated project. It excels at monitoring complex distributed systems.

**Key Features**:

- **Proven Scale**: Handles high-volume production environments with battle-tested reliability
- **Full Observability**: Comprehensive request flow visualization across microservices
- **Multiple Storage Backends**: Supports Elasticsearch, Cassandra, and other scalable storage solutions
- **Kubernetes Native**: Deep integration with cloud-native environments
- **Advanced Sampling**: Configurable sampling strategies (constant, probabilistic, rate-limiting)
- **OpenTelemetry Integration**: Full OTLP support in v2 with native OpenTelemetry data model

**Ideal Use Cases**:

- Large-scale microservices deployments
- Performance bottleneck identification
- Service dependency mapping
- Root cause analysis of distributed failures

**Transport**: Supports both native Jaeger protocol and OTLP

### Grafana Tempo - Cost-Efficient High-Scale Tracing

**Best for**: High-volume environments, cost-conscious deployments, and Grafana ecosystem users

[Grafana Tempo](https://grafana.com/oss/tempo/) is a high-scale, low-cost distributed tracing backend that eliminates expensive indexing by leveraging object storage (S3, GCS, Azure Blob).

**Key Features**:

- **Extreme Cost Efficiency**: Uses cheap object storage instead of expensive databases (Elasticsearch/Cassandra)
- **Massive Scale**: Designed to handle 100% trace capture without prohibitive costs
- **No Heavy Indexing**: Lightweight bloom filters instead of full-text indexes reduce storage costs dramatically
- **TraceQL Query Language**: Powerful query language inspired by PromQL and LogQL
- **Grafana Ecosystem Integration**: Deep integration with Grafana, Prometheus, Loki, and Mimir
- **Multi-Protocol Support**: Compatible with Jaeger, Zipkin, OpenCensus, and OpenTelemetry

**Ideal Use Cases**:

- High-volume microservices (170k+ spans/second proven in production)
- Cost-sensitive environments requiring long trace retention
- Organizations already using Grafana stack
- Teams wanting 100% trace capture without sampling

**Transport**: Uses OTLP (OpenTelemetry Protocol) via gRPC

### Other Compatible Backends

The OTLP exporter also works with commercial APM solutions:

- **Datadog APM** - Full-featured commercial observability platform
- **New Relic** - Cloud-based application performance monitoring
- **Honeycomb** - Observability for production systems
- **Zipkin** - Lightweight distributed tracing (legacy but widely supported)

## What Gets Traced

- **Tool invocations** - Full lifecycle with arguments, results, and timing
- **Prompt rendering** - Template processing and message generation
- **Resource fetching** - URI resolution, caching, and content retrieval
- **Gateway federation** - Cross-gateway requests and health checks
- **Plugin execution** - Pre/post hooks if plugins are enabled
- **Errors and exceptions** - Full stack traces and error context

## Quick Start

### 1. Install Dependencies

The observability packages are included in the Docker containers by default. For local development:

```bash
# Install base gateway with core observability support
pip install mcp-contextforge-gateway[observability]
```

**Important**: Only one exporter backend should be installed at a time - they are mutually exclusive. Install the specific backend package based on your chosen observability platform (see backend-specific instructions in the "Start Your Backend" section below).

### 2. Configure Environment

Set these environment variables (or add to `.env`):

```bash
# Enable observability (default: false)
export OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY=true

# Service identification
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway
export OTEL_SERVICE_VERSION=1.0.0-RC-1
export OTEL_DEPLOYMENT_ENVIRONMENT=development

# Choose your backend (otlp, jaeger, zipkin, console, none)
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp

# OTLP Configuration (for Phoenix, Tempo, etc.)
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:4317
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL=grpc
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE=true
```

### 3. Start Your Backend

Choose your preferred observability backend:

#### Phoenix (AI/LLM Focus)

```bash
# Install Phoenix exporter backend
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-grpc

# Start Phoenix
docker run -d \
  --name phoenix \
  -p 6006:6006 \
  -p 4317:4317 \
  arizephoenix/phoenix:latest

# Configure environment
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:4317
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway

# View UI at http://localhost:6006
```

#### Jaeger

```bash
# Install Jaeger exporter backend
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-jaeger

# Start Jaeger
docker run -d \
  --name jaeger \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 14268:14268 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one

# Configure environment
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=jaeger
export OTEL_EXPORTER_JAEGER_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:14268/api/traces
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway

# View UI at http://localhost:16686
```

#### Zipkin

```bash
# Install Zipkin exporter backend
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-zipkin

# Start Zipkin
docker run -d \
  --name zipkin \
  -p 9411:9411 \
  openzipkin/zipkin

# Configure environment
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=zipkin
export OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway

# View UI at http://localhost:9411
```

#### Grafana Tempo

```bash
# Install OTLP exporter backend (Tempo uses OTLP)
pip install opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-grpc

# Start Tempo
docker run -d \
  --name tempo \
  -p 4317:4317 \
  -p 3200:3200 \
  grafana/tempo:latest

# Configure environment (uses OTLP)
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:4317
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway
```

#### Console (Development)

```bash
# For debugging - prints traces to stdout
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=console
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=mcp-gateway
```

### 4. Run ContextForge

```bash
# Start the gateway (observability is disabled by default)
mcpgateway

# Or with Docker
docker run -e OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY=true \
           -e OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://host.docker.internal:4317 \
           ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
```

## Configuration Reference

### Core Settings

| Variable | Description | Default | Options |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY` | Master switch | `false` | `true`, `false` |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME` | Service identifier | `mcp-gateway` | Any string |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_VERSION` | Service version | `1.0.0-RC-1` | Any string |
| `OTEL_DEPLOYMENT_ENVIRONMENT` | Environment tag | `development` | `development`, `staging`, `production` |
| `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER` | Export backend | `otlp` | `otlp`, `jaeger`, `zipkin`, `console`, `none` |
| `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` | Custom attributes | - | `key=value,key2=value2` |

### OTLP Configuration

| Variable | Description | Default | Example |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` | Collector endpoint | - | `http://localhost:4317` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL` | Protocol | `grpc` | `grpc`, `http/protobuf` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS` | Auth headers | - | `api-key=secret,x-auth=token` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE` | Skip TLS verify | `true` | `true`, `false` |

### Alternative Backends

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_JAEGER_ENDPOINT` | Jaeger collector | `http://localhost:14268/api/traces` |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT` | Zipkin collector | `http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans` |

### Performance Tuning

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER` | Sampling strategy | `parentbased_traceidratio` |
| `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG` | Sample rate (0.0-1.0) | `0.1` (10%) |
| `OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE` | Max queued spans | `2048` |
| `OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE` | Batch size | `512` |
| `OTEL_BSP_SCHEDULE_DELAY` | Export interval (ms) | `5000` |

## Understanding Traces

### Span Attributes

Each span includes standard attributes:

- **Operation name** - e.g., `tool.invoke`, `prompt.render`, `resource.read`
- **Service info** - Service name, version, environment
- **User context** - User ID, tenant ID, request ID
- **Timing** - Start time, duration, end time
- **Status** - Success/error status with error details

### Tool Invocation Spans

```json
{
  "name": "tool.invoke",
  "attributes": {
    "tool.name": "github_search",
    "tool.id": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716",
    "tool.integration_type": "REST",
    "arguments_count": 3,
    "success": true,
    "duration.ms": 234.5,
    "http.status_code": 200
  }
}
```

### Error Tracking

Failed operations include:

- `error`: `true`
- `error.type`: Exception class name
- `error.message`: Error description
- Full stack trace via `span.record_exception()`

## Production Deployment

### Docker Compose

Use the provided compose files:

```bash
# Start ContextForge with Phoenix observability
docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml \
               -f docker-compose.with-phoenix.yml up -d
```

### Kubernetes

Add environment variables to your deployment:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcp-gateway
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      containers:

      - name: gateway
        image: ghcr.io/ibm/mcp-context-forge:1.0.0-RC-1
        env:

        - name: OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY
          value: "true"

        - name: OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER
          value: "otlp"

        - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
          value: "http://otel-collector:4317"

        - name: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
          valueFrom:
            fieldRef:
              fieldPath: metadata.labels['app.kubernetes.io/name']
```

### Sampling Strategies

For production, adjust sampling to balance visibility and performance:

```bash
# Sample 1% of traces
export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER=parentbased_traceidratio
export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG=0.01

# Always sample errors (coming in future update)
# export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER=parentbased_always_on_errors
```

## Testing Your Setup

### Generate Test Traces

Use the trace generator helper to verify your observability backend is working:

```bash
# Activate virtual environment if needed
. /home/cmihai/.venv/mcpgateway/bin/activate

# Run the trace generator
python tests/integration/helpers/trace_generator.py
```

This will send sample traces for:

- Tool invocations
- Prompt rendering
- Resource fetching
- Gateway federation
- Complex workflows with nested spans

## Troubleshooting

### No Traces Appearing

1. Check observability is enabled:

   ```bash
   echo $OTEL_ENABLE_OBSERVABILITY  # Should be "true"
   ```

2. Verify endpoint is reachable:

   ```bash
   curl -v http://localhost:4317  # Should connect
   ```

3. Use console exporter for debugging:

   ```bash
   export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=console
   mcpgateway  # Traces will print to stdout
   ```

### High Memory Usage

Reduce batch size and queue limits:

```bash
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_QUEUE_SIZE=512
export OTEL_BSP_MAX_EXPORT_BATCH_SIZE=128
```

### Missing Spans

Check sampling rate:

```bash
# Temporarily disable sampling
export OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER=always_on
```

## Performance Impact

- **When disabled**: Zero overhead (no-op context managers)
- **When enabled**: ~0.1-0.5ms per span
- **Memory**: ~50MB for typical workload
- **Network**: Batched exports every 5 seconds

## Next Steps

- See [Phoenix Integration Guide](phoenix.md) for AI/LLM-specific features
- Review [OpenTelemetry Best Practices](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/best-practices/)
- Configure dashboards in your APM solution
- Set up alerting based on error rates and latencies
