docs/docs/using/index.md, before:

# Using MCP Gateway

This section focuses on how to use MCP Gateway effectively as a developer, integrator, or end user.

---

## 👨💻 Typical Use Cases

- You want to expose tools, prompts, or resources via MCP.
- You want to use `mcpgateway-wrapper` to connect to any MCP Gateway service using `stdio`, while still supporting authentication to the gateway.
- You're building a client or agent framework that speaks the MCP protocol.
- You want to consume Gateway APIs from an LLM agent, browser app, or CLI tool.

---

## 📚 What You'll Find in This Section

| Page | Description |
|------|-------------|
| [Tool Annotations](tool-annotations.md) | Configure behavior hints for tools (safety, idempotency, etc.) |
| [mcpgateway-wrapper](mcpgateway-wrapper.md) | Wrap CLI tools or subprocesses to expose them via SSE/stdio |
| [Clients](clients/index.md) | Compatible UIs and developer tools |
| [Agents](agents/index.md) | LangChain, LangGraph, CrewAI, and other frameworks |

---

## 🔑 Authentication Reminder

All Gateway usage requires authentication unless `AUTH_REQUIRED=false`. Refer to:

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" http://localhost:4444/tools
```

The Admin UI uses email/password authentication (`PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL` / `PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD`). Basic auth is only used if you explicitly enable `API_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true` or `DOCS_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true`.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/index.md, after:

# Using ContextForge

This section focuses on how to use ContextForge effectively as a developer, integrator, or end user.

---

## 👨💻 Typical Use Cases

- You want to expose tools, prompts, or resources via MCP.
- You want to use `mcpgateway-wrapper` to connect to any ContextForge service using `stdio`, while still supporting authentication to the gateway.
- You're building a client or agent framework that speaks the MCP protocol.
- You want to consume Gateway APIs from an LLM agent, browser app, or CLI tool.

---

## 📚 What You'll Find in This Section

| Page | Description |
|------|-------------|
| [Tool Annotations](tool-annotations.md) | Configure behavior hints for tools (safety, idempotency, etc.) |
| [mcpgateway-wrapper](mcpgateway-wrapper.md) | Wrap CLI tools or subprocesses to expose them via SSE/stdio |
| [Clients](clients/index.md) | Compatible UIs and developer tools |
| [Agents](agents/index.md) | LangChain, LangGraph, CrewAI, and other frameworks |

---

## 🔑 Authentication Reminder

All Gateway usage requires authentication unless `AUTH_REQUIRED=false`. Refer to:

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" http://localhost:4444/tools
```

The Admin UI uses email/password authentication (`PLATFORM_ADMIN_EMAIL` / `PLATFORM_ADMIN_PASSWORD`). Basic auth is only used if you explicitly enable `API_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true` or `DOCS_ALLOW_BASIC_AUTH=true`.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---
