docs/docs/using/mcpgateway-translate.md, before:

# MCP Gateway Transport Bridge (`mcpgateway.translate`)

`mcpgateway.translate` is a powerful command-line tool that bridges Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers across different transport protocols. It enables seamless communication between stdio/JSON-RPC, HTTP/SSE, and streamable HTTP protocols, making MCP servers accessible from various clients and environments.

## Overview

The transport bridge solves a common problem in MCP deployments: protocol incompatibility. Many MCP servers communicate via stdio (standard input/output), while web applications need HTTP-based protocols. This tool provides bidirectional bridging between:

- **Standard I/O (stdio)**: Traditional command-line MCP servers
- **Server-Sent Events (SSE)**: Real-time streaming for web browsers
- **Streamable HTTP**: Modern HTTP-based MCP protocol with session management

## Transport Modes

### 1. StdIO → SSE

Expose a local stdio-based MCP server over HTTP with Server-Sent Events.

**Use case**: Making command-line MCP servers accessible to web browsers.

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000
```

**Endpoints**:

- `GET /sse` - SSE stream for receiving messages
- `POST /message` - Send JSON-RPC requests
- `GET /healthz` - Health check

### 2. SSE → StdIO

Connect to a remote SSE endpoint and bridge to local stdio process.

**Use case**: Integrating remote MCP servers with local CLI tools.

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --connect-sse "https://api.example.com/sse" \
  --stdioCommand "uvx mcp-client" \
  --oauth2Bearer "your-token"
```

### 3. StdIO → Streamable HTTP

Expose a local stdio MCP server via the streamable HTTP protocol.

**Use case**: Modern HTTP API with session management and flexible response modes.

```bash
# Stateful mode with SSE streaming
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-filesystem" \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 9000

# Stateless mode with JSON responses
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 9000 \
  --stateless \
  --jsonResponse
```

**Endpoints**:

- `POST /mcp` - Handle MCP requests
- `GET /mcp` - SSE stream (when not in JSON response mode)
- `GET /healthz` - Health check

### 4. Streamable HTTP → StdIO

Bridge a remote streamable HTTP endpoint to local stdio.

**Use case**: Connecting cloud-hosted MCP servers to local development tools.

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --connect-streamable-http "https://api.example.com/mcp" \
  --stdioCommand "uvx mcp-client" \
  --oauth2Bearer "your-token"
```

### 5. Multi-Protocol Server (New!)

Expose a single stdio server via multiple protocols simultaneously.

**Use case**: Maximum compatibility - different clients can connect using their preferred protocol.

```bash
# Expose via both SSE and Streamable HTTP
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-time" \
  --expose-sse \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 9000
```

## Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Multi-protocol bridging** | Seamlessly convert between stdio, SSE, and streamable HTTP |
| **Bidirectional communication** | Full duplex message flow in all modes |
| **Session management** | Stateful sessions with event replay (streamable HTTP) |
| **Flexible response modes** | Choose between SSE streams or JSON responses |
| **Dynamic environment injection** | Extract HTTP headers and inject as environment variables for multi-tenant support |
| **Keep-alive support** | Automatic keepalive frames prevent connection timeouts |
| **CORS configuration** | Enable cross-origin requests for web applications |
| **Authentication** | OAuth2 Bearer token support for secure connections |
| **Health monitoring** | Built-in health check endpoint for container orchestration |
| **Graceful shutdown** | Clean process termination on SIGINT/SIGTERM |
| **Retry logic** | Automatic reconnection with exponential backoff |

## Installation

```bash
# Install from PyPI
pip install mcp-contextforge-gateway
```

## Command-Line Reference

### Basic Syntax

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate [TRANSPORT] [OPTIONS]
```

### Transport Options

#### Local Server (stdio)

##### `--stdio <command>`
Start a local process that communicates via stdio.

**Example**: `--stdio "uvx mcp-server-git"`

#### Exposure Options (use with --stdio)

##### `--expose-sse`
Expose the stdio server via Server-Sent Events protocol.

##### `--expose-streamable-http`
Expose the stdio server via streamable HTTP protocol.

**Note**: You can use both `--expose-sse` and `--expose-streamable-http` together to expose via multiple protocols simultaneously.

#### Remote Connection Options

##### `--connect-sse <url>`
Connect to a remote SSE endpoint.

**Example**: `--connect-sse "https://api.example.com/sse"`

##### `--connect-streamable-http <url>`
Connect to a remote streamable HTTP endpoint.

**Example**: `--connect-streamable-http "https://api.example.com/mcp"`

### Configuration Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--port <number>` | HTTP server port (local modes) | 8000 |
| `--host <address>` | Bind address (local modes) | 127.0.0.1 |
| `--cors <origins...>` | CORS allowed origins (space-separated) | None |
| `--oauth2Bearer <token>` | Bearer token for remote authentication | None |
| `--logLevel <level>` | Logging verbosity (debug/info/warning/error/critical) | info |
| `--stdioCommand <command>` | Local command for remote→stdio bridging | None |

### Streamable HTTP Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--stateless` | Use stateless mode (no session management) | False |
| `--jsonResponse` | Return JSON instead of SSE streams | False |

### SSE Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--ssePath <path>` | SSE endpoint path | /sse |
| `--messagePath <path>` | Message POST endpoint path | /message |
| `--keepAlive <seconds>` | Keepalive interval | 30 |

### Dynamic Environment Variable Injection

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--enable-dynamic-env` | Enable dynamic environment variable injection from HTTP headers | False |
| `--header-to-env <HEADER=ENV_VAR>` | Map HTTP header to environment variable (can be specified multiple times) | None |

**Use case**: Multi-tenant deployments where different users need different credentials passed to the MCP server.

**Example - GitHub Enterprise with per-user tokens**:
```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-github" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000 \
  --enable-dynamic-env \
  --header-to-env "Authorization=GITHUB_TOKEN" \
  --header-to-env "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host=GITHUB_HOST"
```

**Client request with headers**:
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/message \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ghp_user123token" \
  -H "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host: github.company.com" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/list"}'
```

**Security features**:

- Header names validated (alphanumeric + hyphens only)
- Environment variable names validated (standard naming rules)
- Values sanitized (dangerous characters removed, length limits enforced)
- Case-insensitive header matching
- Headers not provided in mappings are ignored

## API Documentation

### SSE Mode Endpoints

#### `GET /sse`

Establishes an SSE connection for receiving MCP messages.

**Response**: Server-Sent Events stream

**Events**:

- `endpoint`: Initial bootstrap with unique message URL
- `message`: JSON-RPC responses from the MCP server
- `keepalive`: Periodic keepalive signals

**Example**:
```javascript
const evtSource = new EventSource('http://localhost:9000/sse');
evtSource.addEventListener('message', (event) => {
  const response = JSON.parse(event.data);
  console.log('MCP Response:', response);
});
```

#### `POST /message`

Send JSON-RPC requests to the MCP server.

**Request**:
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "tools/list",
  "params": {}
}
```

**Response**: 202 Accepted or 400 Bad Request

### Streamable HTTP Mode Endpoints

#### `POST /mcp`

Handle MCP protocol requests.

**Stateless Mode Request**:
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/mcp \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"initialize","params":{...}}'
```

**Stateful Mode**: Includes session management headers

#### `GET /mcp`

Establish SSE stream for stateful sessions (when not using JSON response mode).

### Common Endpoints

#### `GET /healthz`

Health check endpoint for monitoring and orchestration.

**Response**: `200 OK` with body `"ok"`

## Complete Examples

### Web Application Integration

Expose a local MCP server for browser access:

```bash
# Start the bridge
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-filesystem --directory ./docs" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000 \
  --cors "http://localhost:3000" "https://myapp.com"

# In your web app
const response = await fetch('http://localhost:9000/message', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    jsonrpc: '2.0',
    id: 1,
    method: 'resources/list'
  })
});
```

### Corporate Proxy Setup

Bridge internal MCP servers to external clients:

```bash
# On proxy server
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-internal" \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 443 \
  --host 0.0.0.0 \
  --stateless \
  --cors "*"

# From external client
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --connect-streamable-http "https://proxy.corp.com/mcp" \
  --oauth2Bearer "$CORP_TOKEN" \
  --stdioCommand "local-mcp-client"
```

### Development Environment

Quick setup for testing MCP servers:

```bash
# Terminal 1: Start server bridge
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9001 \
  --logLevel debug

# Terminal 2: Test with curl
curl -X POST http://localhost:9001/message \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/list"}'

# Terminal 3: Watch SSE stream
curl -N http://localhost:9001/sse
```

### Multi-Tenant GitHub Enterprise

Enable per-user GitHub tokens for enterprise deployments:

```bash
# Start the bridge with dynamic environment injection
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-github" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000 \
  --enable-dynamic-env \
  --header-to-env "Authorization=GITHUB_TOKEN" \
  --header-to-env "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host=GITHUB_HOST"

# User A's request (uses their personal access token)
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/message \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ghp_userA_token123" \
  -H "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host: github.company.com" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/call","params":{"name":"get_repositories"}}'

# User B's request (uses their own token)
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/message \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ghp_userB_token456" \
  -H "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host: github.company.com" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":2,"method":"tools/call","params":{"name":"get_repositories"}}'
```

**Benefits**:

- Each user's credentials are isolated per request
- No shared token security risks
- Supports different enterprise hosts per user
- MCP server process restarts with new credentials for each request

### Container Deployment

```dockerfile
FROM python:3.11-slim
RUN pip install mcpgateway mcp
EXPOSE 8000
HEALTHCHECK CMD curl -f http://localhost:8000/healthz || exit 1
CMD ["python", "-m", "mcpgateway.translate", \
     "--stdio", "uvx mcp-server-sqlite", \
     "--expose-streamable-http", \
     "--port", "8000", \
     "--host", "0.0.0.0", \
     "--stateless"]
```

## Protocol Comparison

| Feature | SSE | Streamable HTTP |
|---------|-----|-----------------|
| **Streaming** | ✅ Yes | ✅ Optional |
| **Bidirectional** | ✅ Via backchannel | ✅ Native |
| **Session Management** | ❌ No | ✅ Optional |
| **Event Replay** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **JSON Response Mode** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Browser Support** | ✅ Native EventSource | ✅ Fetch API |
| **Complexity** | Simple | Moderate |

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "MCP server components are required"
**Solution**: Install the MCP library
```bash
pip install mcp
```

#### Connection timeouts with SSE
**Solution**: Adjust keepalive interval
```bash
--keepAlive 15  # More frequent keepalives
```

#### CORS errors in browser
**Solution**: Configure allowed origins
```bash
--cors "http://localhost:3000" "https://yourapp.com"
```

#### Authentication failures
**Solution**: Verify token format
```bash
--oauth2Bearer "Bearer your-token"  # Note: Include "Bearer" prefix if required
```

### Debug Mode

Enable detailed logging to troubleshoot issues:

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "your-mcp-server" \
  --port 9000 \
  --logLevel debug
```

## Performance Considerations

### Stateless vs Stateful

- **Stateless** (`--stateless`): Better for high-volume, short-lived connections
- **Stateful**: Better for long-running sessions with context preservation

### JSON vs SSE Responses

- **JSON** (`--jsonResponse`): Lower latency, simpler client implementation
- **SSE**: Real-time streaming, better for continuous updates

### Connection Pooling

When bridging to remote endpoints, connections are reused with automatic retry:

- Initial retry delay: 1 second
- Exponential backoff: Up to 30 seconds
- Maximum retries: 5 (configurable in code)

## Security Best Practices

1. **Bind to localhost** by default (`--host 127.0.0.1`)
2. **Use CORS restrictions** to limit allowed origins
3. **Enable authentication** with `--oauth2Bearer` for remote endpoints
4. **Run with minimal privileges** in production
5. **Use HTTPS** when exposing to public networks (reverse proxy recommended)

## Integration with MCP Gateway

This tool complements the full MCP Gateway by providing:

- Lightweight alternative for simple bridging needs
- Development and testing utility
- Protocol conversion without full gateway features

For production deployments requiring:

- Multiple server management
- Persistent configuration
- Advanced routing
- Admin UI

Consider using the full [MCP Gateway](../overview/index.md).

## Advanced Configuration

### Configuration

`mcpgateway.translate` reads its configuration from command-line arguments
only, with one exception: the HTTP `Content-Type` header defaults to the
`FORGE_CONTENT_TYPE` environment variable (falls back to `application/json`).
If you want shell-friendly defaults, wrap the invocation with an alias or
script:

```bash
alias translate-git='python3 -m mcpgateway.translate --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9000 --expose-sse'
translate-git
```

Optional: adjust the outbound content type once for your shell session:

```bash
export FORGE_CONTENT_TYPE=application/json
```

### Custom Headers

For advanced authentication scenarios, modify the code to add custom headers:

```python
headers = {
    "Authorization": f"Bearer {token}",
    "X-API-Key": api_key,
    "X-Request-ID": request_id
}
```

## Notes

- **Protocol Support**: All three protocols (stdio, SSE, streamable HTTP) are fully implemented
- **Dependencies**: Streamable HTTP requires `pip install mcp`
- **Bidirectional Flow**: Use `--stdioCommand` for remote→local bridging
- **Performance**: Stateless mode recommended for high-traffic scenarios
- **Compatibility**: Works with all MCP-compliant servers and clients

## gRPC Service Exposure

`mcpgateway.translate` now supports exposing gRPC services as MCP tools via automatic service discovery.

### Quick Start

Expose a local gRPC server via HTTP/SSE:

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate --grpc localhost:50051 --port 9000
```

### gRPC CLI Options

| Flag | Description | Example |
|------|-------------|---------|
| `--grpc` | gRPC server target (host:port) | `--grpc localhost:50051` |
| `--connect-grpc` | Remote gRPC endpoint to connect to | `--connect-grpc api.example.com:443` |
| `--grpc-tls` | Enable TLS for gRPC connection | `--grpc-tls` |
| `--grpc-cert` | Path to TLS certificate | `--grpc-cert /path/to/cert.pem` |
| `--grpc-key` | Path to TLS key | `--grpc-key /path/to/key.pem` |
| `--grpc-metadata` | gRPC metadata headers (repeatable) | `--grpc-metadata "auth=Bearer token"` |

### Examples

**Basic gRPC exposure:**
```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --grpc localhost:50051 \
  --port 9000
```

**With TLS and authentication:**
```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --grpc api.example.com:443 \
  --grpc-tls \
  --grpc-cert /etc/ssl/certs/client.pem \
  --grpc-key /etc/ssl/private/client.key \
  --grpc-metadata "authorization=Bearer my-token" \
  --grpc-metadata "x-tenant-id=customer-1" \
  --port 9000
```

### How It Works

1. **Connects** to the gRPC server at the specified target
2. **Uses** [gRPC Server Reflection](https://grpc.io/docs/guides/reflection/) to discover services
3. **Translates** between gRPC/Protobuf and MCP/JSON protocols
4. **Exposes** each gRPC method as an MCP tool via HTTP/SSE

### Requirements

- gRPC server must have **server reflection enabled**
- Server must be reachable from the gateway
- For TLS: Valid certificates and keys

For full gRPC service management (registry, admin UI, persistence), see [gRPC Services](grpc-services.md).

## Related Documentation

- [gRPC Services](grpc-services.md)
- [MCP Gateway Overview](../overview/index.md)
- [MCP Protocol Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io)
- [Transport Protocols](../architecture/index.md#system-architecture)
- [Authentication Guide](../manage/securing.md)

## Support

For issues, feature requests, or contributions:

- GitHub: [mcp-context-forge](https://github.com/contingentai/mcp-context-forge)
- Issues: [Report bugs](https://github.com/contingentai/mcp-context-forge/issues)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/mcpgateway-translate.md, after:

# ContextForge Transport Bridge (`mcpgateway.translate`)

`mcpgateway.translate` is a powerful command-line tool that bridges Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers across different transport protocols. It enables seamless communication between stdio/JSON-RPC, HTTP/SSE, and streamable HTTP protocols, making MCP servers accessible from various clients and environments.

## Overview

The transport bridge solves a common problem in MCP deployments: protocol incompatibility. Many MCP servers communicate via stdio (standard input/output), while web applications need HTTP-based protocols. This tool provides bidirectional bridging between:

- **Standard I/O (stdio)**: Traditional command-line MCP servers
- **Server-Sent Events (SSE)**: Real-time streaming for web browsers
- **Streamable HTTP**: Modern HTTP-based MCP protocol with session management

## Transport Modes

### 1. StdIO → SSE

Expose a local stdio-based MCP server over HTTP with Server-Sent Events.

**Use case**: Making command-line MCP servers accessible to web browsers.

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000
```

**Endpoints**:

- `GET /sse` - SSE stream for receiving messages
- `POST /message` - Send JSON-RPC requests
- `GET /healthz` - Health check

### 2. SSE → StdIO

Connect to a remote SSE endpoint and bridge to local stdio process.

**Use case**: Integrating remote MCP servers with local CLI tools.

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --connect-sse "https://api.example.com/sse" \
  --stdioCommand "uvx mcp-client" \
  --oauth2Bearer "your-token"
```

### 3. StdIO → Streamable HTTP

Expose a local stdio MCP server via the streamable HTTP protocol.

**Use case**: Modern HTTP API with session management and flexible response modes.

```bash
# Stateful mode with SSE streaming
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-filesystem" \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 9000

# Stateless mode with JSON responses
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 9000 \
  --stateless \
  --jsonResponse
```

**Endpoints**:

- `POST /mcp` - Handle MCP requests
- `GET /mcp` - SSE stream (when not in JSON response mode)
- `GET /healthz` - Health check

### 4. Streamable HTTP → StdIO

Bridge a remote streamable HTTP endpoint to local stdio.

**Use case**: Connecting cloud-hosted MCP servers to local development tools.

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --connect-streamable-http "https://api.example.com/mcp" \
  --stdioCommand "uvx mcp-client" \
  --oauth2Bearer "your-token"
```

### 5. Multi-Protocol Server (New!)

Expose a single stdio server via multiple protocols simultaneously.

**Use case**: Maximum compatibility - different clients can connect using their preferred protocol.

```bash
# Expose via both SSE and Streamable HTTP
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-time" \
  --expose-sse \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 9000
```

## Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Multi-protocol bridging** | Seamlessly convert between stdio, SSE, and streamable HTTP |
| **Bidirectional communication** | Full duplex message flow in all modes |
| **Session management** | Stateful sessions with event replay (streamable HTTP) |
| **Flexible response modes** | Choose between SSE streams or JSON responses |
| **Dynamic environment injection** | Extract HTTP headers and inject as environment variables for multi-tenant support |
| **Keep-alive support** | Automatic keepalive frames prevent connection timeouts |
| **CORS configuration** | Enable cross-origin requests for web applications |
| **Authentication** | OAuth2 Bearer token support for secure connections |
| **Health monitoring** | Built-in health check endpoint for container orchestration |
| **Graceful shutdown** | Clean process termination on SIGINT/SIGTERM |
| **Retry logic** | Automatic reconnection with exponential backoff |

## Installation

```bash
# Install from PyPI
pip install mcp-contextforge-gateway
```

## Command-Line Reference

### Basic Syntax

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate [TRANSPORT] [OPTIONS]
```

### Transport Options

#### Local Server (stdio)

##### `--stdio <command>`
Start a local process that communicates via stdio.

**Example**: `--stdio "uvx mcp-server-git"`

#### Exposure Options (use with --stdio)

##### `--expose-sse`
Expose the stdio server via Server-Sent Events protocol.

##### `--expose-streamable-http`
Expose the stdio server via streamable HTTP protocol.

**Note**: You can use both `--expose-sse` and `--expose-streamable-http` together to expose via multiple protocols simultaneously.

#### Remote Connection Options

##### `--connect-sse <url>`
Connect to a remote SSE endpoint.

**Example**: `--connect-sse "https://api.example.com/sse"`

##### `--connect-streamable-http <url>`
Connect to a remote streamable HTTP endpoint.

**Example**: `--connect-streamable-http "https://api.example.com/mcp"`

### Configuration Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--port <number>` | HTTP server port (local modes) | 8000 |
| `--host <address>` | Bind address (local modes) | 127.0.0.1 |
| `--cors <origins...>` | CORS allowed origins (space-separated) | None |
| `--oauth2Bearer <token>` | Bearer token for remote authentication | None |
| `--logLevel <level>` | Logging verbosity (debug/info/warning/error/critical) | info |
| `--stdioCommand <command>` | Local command for remote→stdio bridging | None |

### Streamable HTTP Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--stateless` | Use stateless mode (no session management) | False |
| `--jsonResponse` | Return JSON instead of SSE streams | False |

### SSE Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--ssePath <path>` | SSE endpoint path | /sse |
| `--messagePath <path>` | Message POST endpoint path | /message |
| `--keepAlive <seconds>` | Keepalive interval | 30 |

### Dynamic Environment Variable Injection

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--enable-dynamic-env` | Enable dynamic environment variable injection from HTTP headers | False |
| `--header-to-env <HEADER=ENV_VAR>` | Map HTTP header to environment variable (can be specified multiple times) | None |

**Use case**: Multi-tenant deployments where different users need different credentials passed to the MCP server.

**Example - GitHub Enterprise with per-user tokens**:
```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-github" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000 \
  --enable-dynamic-env \
  --header-to-env "Authorization=GITHUB_TOKEN" \
  --header-to-env "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host=GITHUB_HOST"
```

**Client request with headers**:
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/message \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ghp_user123token" \
  -H "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host: github.company.com" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/list"}'
```

**Security features**:

- Header names validated (alphanumeric + hyphens only)
- Environment variable names validated (standard naming rules)
- Values sanitized (dangerous characters removed, length limits enforced)
- Case-insensitive header matching
- Headers not provided in mappings are ignored

## API Documentation

### SSE Mode Endpoints

#### `GET /sse`

Establishes an SSE connection for receiving MCP messages.

**Response**: Server-Sent Events stream

**Events**:

- `endpoint`: Initial bootstrap with unique message URL
- `message`: JSON-RPC responses from the MCP server
- `keepalive`: Periodic keepalive signals

**Example**:
```javascript
const evtSource = new EventSource('http://localhost:9000/sse');
evtSource.addEventListener('message', (event) => {
  const response = JSON.parse(event.data);
  console.log('MCP Response:', response);
});
```

#### `POST /message`

Send JSON-RPC requests to the MCP server.

**Request**:
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "tools/list",
  "params": {}
}
```

**Response**: 202 Accepted or 400 Bad Request

### Streamable HTTP Mode Endpoints

#### `POST /mcp`

Handle MCP protocol requests.

**Stateless Mode Request**:
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/mcp \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"initialize","params":{...}}'
```

**Stateful Mode**: Includes session management headers

#### `GET /mcp`

Establish SSE stream for stateful sessions (when not using JSON response mode).

### Common Endpoints

#### `GET /healthz`

Health check endpoint for monitoring and orchestration.

**Response**: `200 OK` with body `"ok"`

## Complete Examples

### Web Application Integration

Expose a local MCP server for browser access:

```bash
# Start the bridge
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-filesystem --directory ./docs" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000 \
  --cors "http://localhost:3000" "https://myapp.com"

# In your web app
const response = await fetch('http://localhost:9000/message', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    jsonrpc: '2.0',
    id: 1,
    method: 'resources/list'
  })
});
```

### Corporate Proxy Setup

Bridge internal MCP servers to external clients:

```bash
# On proxy server
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-internal" \
  --expose-streamable-http \
  --port 443 \
  --host 0.0.0.0 \
  --stateless \
  --cors "*"

# From external client
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --connect-streamable-http "https://proxy.corp.com/mcp" \
  --oauth2Bearer "$CORP_TOKEN" \
  --stdioCommand "local-mcp-client"
```

### Development Environment

Quick setup for testing MCP servers:

```bash
# Terminal 1: Start server bridge
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9001 \
  --logLevel debug

# Terminal 2: Test with curl
curl -X POST http://localhost:9001/message \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/list"}'

# Terminal 3: Watch SSE stream
curl -N http://localhost:9001/sse
```

### Multi-Tenant GitHub Enterprise

Enable per-user GitHub tokens for enterprise deployments:

```bash
# Start the bridge with dynamic environment injection
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "uvx mcp-server-github" \
  --expose-sse \
  --port 9000 \
  --enable-dynamic-env \
  --header-to-env "Authorization=GITHUB_TOKEN" \
  --header-to-env "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host=GITHUB_HOST"

# User A's request (uses their personal access token)
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/message \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ghp_userA_token123" \
  -H "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host: github.company.com" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/call","params":{"name":"get_repositories"}}'

# User B's request (uses their own token)
curl -X POST http://localhost:9000/message \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer ghp_userB_token456" \
  -H "X-GitHub-Enterprise-Host: github.company.com" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":2,"method":"tools/call","params":{"name":"get_repositories"}}'
```

**Benefits**:

- Each user's credentials are isolated per request
- No shared token security risks
- Supports different enterprise hosts per user
- MCP server process restarts with new credentials for each request

### Container Deployment

```dockerfile
FROM python:3.11-slim
RUN pip install mcpgateway mcp
EXPOSE 8000
HEALTHCHECK CMD curl -f http://localhost:8000/healthz || exit 1
CMD ["python", "-m", "mcpgateway.translate", \
     "--stdio", "uvx mcp-server-sqlite", \
     "--expose-streamable-http", \
     "--port", "8000", \
     "--host", "0.0.0.0", \
     "--stateless"]
```

## Protocol Comparison

| Feature | SSE | Streamable HTTP |
|---------|-----|-----------------|
| **Streaming** | ✅ Yes | ✅ Optional |
| **Bidirectional** | ✅ Via backchannel | ✅ Native |
| **Session Management** | ❌ No | ✅ Optional |
| **Event Replay** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **JSON Response Mode** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Browser Support** | ✅ Native EventSource | ✅ Fetch API |
| **Complexity** | Simple | Moderate |

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "MCP server components are required"
**Solution**: Install the MCP library
```bash
pip install mcp
```

#### Connection timeouts with SSE
**Solution**: Adjust keepalive interval
```bash
--keepAlive 15  # More frequent keepalives
```

#### CORS errors in browser
**Solution**: Configure allowed origins
```bash
--cors "http://localhost:3000" "https://yourapp.com"
```

#### Authentication failures
**Solution**: Verify token format
```bash
--oauth2Bearer "Bearer your-token"  # Note: Include "Bearer" prefix if required
```

### Debug Mode

Enable detailed logging to troubleshoot issues:

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --stdio "your-mcp-server" \
  --port 9000 \
  --logLevel debug
```

## Performance Considerations

### Stateless vs Stateful

- **Stateless** (`--stateless`): Better for high-volume, short-lived connections
- **Stateful**: Better for long-running sessions with context preservation

### JSON vs SSE Responses

- **JSON** (`--jsonResponse`): Lower latency, simpler client implementation
- **SSE**: Real-time streaming, better for continuous updates

### Connection Pooling

When bridging to remote endpoints, connections are reused with automatic retry:

- Initial retry delay: 1 second
- Exponential backoff: Up to 30 seconds
- Maximum retries: 5 (configurable in code)

## Security Best Practices

1. **Bind to localhost** by default (`--host 127.0.0.1`)
2. **Use CORS restrictions** to limit allowed origins
3. **Enable authentication** with `--oauth2Bearer` for remote endpoints
4. **Run with minimal privileges** in production
5. **Use HTTPS** when exposing to public networks (reverse proxy recommended)

## Integration with ContextForge

This tool complements the full ContextForge by providing:

- Lightweight alternative for simple bridging needs
- Development and testing utility
- Protocol conversion without full gateway features

For production deployments requiring:

- Multiple server management
- Persistent configuration
- Advanced routing
- Admin UI

Consider using the full [ContextForge](../overview/index.md).

## Advanced Configuration

### Configuration

`mcpgateway.translate` reads its configuration from command-line arguments
only, with one exception: the HTTP `Content-Type` header defaults to the
`FORGE_CONTENT_TYPE` environment variable (falls back to `application/json`).
If you want shell-friendly defaults, wrap the invocation with an alias or
script:

```bash
alias translate-git='python3 -m mcpgateway.translate --stdio "uvx mcp-server-git" --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9000 --expose-sse'
translate-git
```

Optional: adjust the outbound content type once for your shell session:

```bash
export FORGE_CONTENT_TYPE=application/json
```

### Custom Headers

For advanced authentication scenarios, modify the code to add custom headers:

```python
headers = {
    "Authorization": f"Bearer {token}",
    "X-API-Key": api_key,
    "X-Request-ID": request_id
}
```

## Notes

- **Protocol Support**: All three protocols (stdio, SSE, streamable HTTP) are fully implemented
- **Dependencies**: Streamable HTTP requires `pip install mcp`
- **Bidirectional Flow**: Use `--stdioCommand` for remote→local bridging
- **Performance**: Stateless mode recommended for high-traffic scenarios
- **Compatibility**: Works with all MCP-compliant servers and clients

## gRPC Service Exposure

`mcpgateway.translate` now supports exposing gRPC services as MCP tools via automatic service discovery.

### Quick Start

Expose a local gRPC server via HTTP/SSE:

```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate --grpc localhost:50051 --port 9000
```

### gRPC CLI Options

| Flag | Description | Example |
|------|-------------|---------|
| `--grpc` | gRPC server target (host:port) | `--grpc localhost:50051` |
| `--connect-grpc` | Remote gRPC endpoint to connect to | `--connect-grpc api.example.com:443` |
| `--grpc-tls` | Enable TLS for gRPC connection | `--grpc-tls` |
| `--grpc-cert` | Path to TLS certificate | `--grpc-cert /path/to/cert.pem` |
| `--grpc-key` | Path to TLS key | `--grpc-key /path/to/key.pem` |
| `--grpc-metadata` | gRPC metadata headers (repeatable) | `--grpc-metadata "auth=Bearer token"` |

### Examples

**Basic gRPC exposure:**
```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --grpc localhost:50051 \
  --port 9000
```

**With TLS and authentication:**
```bash
python3 -m mcpgateway.translate \
  --grpc api.example.com:443 \
  --grpc-tls \
  --grpc-cert /etc/ssl/certs/client.pem \
  --grpc-key /etc/ssl/private/client.key \
  --grpc-metadata "authorization=Bearer my-token" \
  --grpc-metadata "x-tenant-id=customer-1" \
  --port 9000
```

### How It Works

1. **Connects** to the gRPC server at the specified target
2. **Uses** [gRPC Server Reflection](https://grpc.io/docs/guides/reflection/) to discover services
3. **Translates** between gRPC/Protobuf and MCP/JSON protocols
4. **Exposes** each gRPC method as an MCP tool via HTTP/SSE

### Requirements

- gRPC server must have **server reflection enabled**
- Server must be reachable from the gateway
- For TLS: Valid certificates and keys

For full gRPC service management (registry, admin UI, persistence), see [gRPC Services](grpc-services.md).

## Related Documentation

- [gRPC Services](grpc-services.md)
- [ContextForge Overview](../overview/index.md)
- [MCP Protocol Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io)
- [Transport Protocols](../architecture/index.md#system-architecture)
- [Authentication Guide](../manage/securing.md)

## Support

For issues, feature requests, or contributions:

- GitHub: [mcp-context-forge](https://github.com/contingentai/mcp-context-forge)
- Issues: [Report bugs](https://github.com/contingentai/mcp-context-forge/issues)
