plugins/deny_filter/README.md, before:

# Denylist Filter Plugin for MCP Gateway

> Author: Fred Araujo
> Version: 0.1.0

A plugin for detecting deny words in MCP Gateway prompts.

## Features

Detects any deny word in the prompt. If a match is found, rejects the prompt request.

## Installation

1. Copy .env.example .env
2. Enable plugins in `.env`
3. Add the plugin configuration to `plugins/config.yaml`:

```yaml
plugins:
  - name: "DenyListPlugin"
    kind: "plugins.deny_filter.deny.DenyListPlugin"
    description: "A plugin that implements a deny list filter."
    version: "0.1"
    author: "ContextForge"
    hooks: ["prompt_pre_fetch"]
    tags: ["plugin", "filter", "denylist", "pre-post"]
    mode: "enforce"  # enforce | permissive | disabled
    priority: 100
    conditions:
      # Apply to specific tools/servers
      - prompts: ["test_prompt"]
        server_ids: []  # Apply to all servers
        tenant_ids: []  # Apply to all tenants
    config:
      words:
        - innovative
        - groundbreaking
        - revolutionary
```

## Testing

### Run Individual Tests
```bash
# Test only the plugin
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/framework/test_manager.py::test_manager_filter_plugins -v
```

### Manual Testing with the Gateway

1. Enable the plugin in your `.env`:
```bash
PLUGINS_ENABLED=true
```

2. Start the gateway:
```bash
python -m mcpgateway.main
```

3. Test with curl:
```bash
# Test PII detection in prompt arguments
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/prompts/test_prompt \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "args": {
      "user":"say the word revolutionary"
    }
  }'

# Response should be an error with the following body:
# {
#  "message":"Prompt execution arguments contains HTML tags that may cause security issues",
#  "details":"Pre prompting fetch blocked by plugin DenyListPlugin: deny - Prompt not allowed (A deny word was found in the prompt)"
# }
```

## Sample Prompt

Here's a prompt that trips the checks:

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)

curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
           "name":"test_prompt",
           "template":"Hello, {{ user }}!",
           "argument_schema":{
             "type":"object",
             "properties":{"user":{"type":"string"}},
             "required":["user"]
           }
         }' \
     http://localhost:4444/prompts
```

## CURL Command to Test

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)

# Then test with a prompt containing deny words
curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{"user":"say the word revolutionary"}' \
     http://localhost:4444/prompts/test_prompt
```

## License

Apache-2.0

## Support

For issues or questions, please open an issue in the MCP Gateway repository.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

plugins/deny_filter/README.md, after:

# Denylist Filter Plugin for ContextForge

> Author: Fred Araujo
> Version: 0.1.0

A plugin for detecting deny words in ContextForge prompts.

## Features

Detects any deny word in the prompt. If a match is found, rejects the prompt request.

## Installation

1. Copy .env.example .env
2. Enable plugins in `.env`
3. Add the plugin configuration to `plugins/config.yaml`:

```yaml
plugins:
  - name: "DenyListPlugin"
    kind: "plugins.deny_filter.deny.DenyListPlugin"
    description: "A plugin that implements a deny list filter."
    version: "0.1"
    author: "ContextForge"
    hooks: ["prompt_pre_fetch"]
    tags: ["plugin", "filter", "denylist", "pre-post"]
    mode: "enforce"  # enforce | permissive | disabled
    priority: 100
    conditions:
      # Apply to specific tools/servers
      - prompts: ["test_prompt"]
        server_ids: []  # Apply to all servers
        tenant_ids: []  # Apply to all tenants
    config:
      words:
        - innovative
        - groundbreaking
        - revolutionary
```

## Testing

### Run Individual Tests
```bash
# Test only the plugin
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/framework/test_manager.py::test_manager_filter_plugins -v
```

### Manual Testing with the Gateway

1. Enable the plugin in your `.env`:
```bash
PLUGINS_ENABLED=true
```

2. Start the gateway:
```bash
python -m mcpgateway.main
```

3. Test with curl:
```bash
# Test PII detection in prompt arguments
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/prompts/test_prompt \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "args": {
      "user":"say the word revolutionary"
    }
  }'

# Response should be an error with the following body:
# {
#  "message":"Prompt execution arguments contains HTML tags that may cause security issues",
#  "details":"Pre prompting fetch blocked by plugin DenyListPlugin: deny - Prompt not allowed (A deny word was found in the prompt)"
# }
```

## Sample Prompt

Here's a prompt that trips the checks:

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)

curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
           "name":"test_prompt",
           "template":"Hello, {{ user }}!",
           "argument_schema":{
             "type":"object",
             "properties":{"user":{"type":"string"}},
             "required":["user"]
           }
         }' \
     http://localhost:4444/prompts
```

## CURL Command to Test

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)

# Then test with a prompt containing deny words
curl -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{"user":"say the word revolutionary"}' \
     http://localhost:4444/prompts/test_prompt
```

## License

Apache-2.0

## Support

For issues or questions, please open an issue in the ContextForge repository.
