agent_runtimes/langchain_agent/README.md, before:

# MCP LangChain Agent

A production-ready LangChain agent that integrates with the MCP Gateway, providing both OpenAI-compatible chat completions and A2A JSON-RPC endpoints for seamless AI agent communication.

## 🚀 Features

- **🔧 Dynamic Tool Discovery**: Automatically discovers and integrates tools from MCP Gateway
- **🤖 OpenAI-Compatible API**: Standard `/v1/chat/completions` endpoint with streaming support
- **🔄 A2A Communication**: JSON-RPC endpoint for agent-to-agent communication
- **🛡️ Security**: Configurable tool allowlists and authentication
- **📊 Observability**: Health checks, readiness probes, and comprehensive logging
- **⚡ Performance**: Async operations with connection pooling and timeouts
- **🎛️ Configuration**: Environment-based configuration with validation

## 🏗️ Architecture

The agent consists of several key components:

- **FastAPI Application** (`app.py`): Web server with OpenAI and A2A endpoints
- **LangChain Agent** (`agent_langchain.py`): Core AI agent with tool integration
- **MCP Client** (`mcp_client.py`): Gateway communication and tool discovery
- **Configuration** (`config.py`): Environment-based settings management
- **Models** (`models.py`): Pydantic models for API validation

## 📋 API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/health` | GET | Health check for monitoring |
| `/ready` | GET | Readiness check for Kubernetes |
| `/list_tools` | GET | Available tools from MCP Gateway |
| `/v1/chat/completions` | POST | OpenAI-compatible chat API |
| `/a2a` | POST | A2A JSON-RPC communication |

## ✅ User Stories Implemented

- [x] **Dynamic Tool Discovery** - Auto-discovers from gateway or uses allowlist
- [x] **Dual Endpoint Exposure** - OpenAI + A2A JSON-RPC endpoints
- [x] **Parameterized Tool Allow-List** - `TOOLS=` environment variable
- [x] **Tool Schema Introspection** - JSON schema parsing and validation
- [x] **Production Ready** - Comprehensive testing, linting, and deployment tools
- [x] **Modern Development** - pyproject.toml, Makefile, pre-commit hooks

Structure:
```
agent_runtimes/langchain_agent/
├── app.py                    # FastAPI application incl. /v1/chat/completions and /a2a
├── agent_langchain.py    # Core Langchain agent
├── mcp_client.py            # MCP Gateway client
├── models.py                # Pydantic models
├── config.py                # Configuration management
├── start_agent.py           # Startup script
├── requirements.txt         # Dependencies
└── README.md               # This file
```

### Configuration (env vars)
- OPENAI_API_KEY – required
- MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN – JWT for the gateway


## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.10 or higher
- OpenAI API key
- Running MCP Gateway instance

### Installation

**Option 1: Development Setup (Recommended)**
```bash
cd agent_runtimes/langchain_agent

# Install in development mode with all tools
make install-dev

# Setup environment from template
make setup-env

# Edit .env with your configuration
editor .env
```

**Option 2: Production Setup**
```bash
cd agent_runtimes/langchain_agent

# Install production dependencies only
pip install -e .

# Create environment file
cp .env.example .env
editor .env
```

### Configuration
1) Start the MCP Gateway (from project root):
```bash
make serve
```

### Development Workflow

**1. Start the MCP Gateway** (from project root):
```bash
make serve
```

**2. Start the LangChain Agent** (in another terminal):
```bash
cd agent_runtimes/langchain_agent

# Development mode with auto-reload
make dev

# Or production mode
make run
```

**3. Verify everything is working**:
```bash
# Check status
make status

# Health checks
make health ready tools
```

## 🤖 Multi-LLM Provider Support

The agent supports multiple LLM providers. Choose your preferred provider and configure accordingly:

### OpenAI (Default)
```bash
# Setup and install
make setup-env install-dev

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=openai
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-api-key
DEFAULT_MODEL=gpt-4o-mini
```

### Azure OpenAI
```bash
# Setup Azure-specific environment
make setup-azure install-azure

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=azure
AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY=your-azure-api-key
AZURE_OPENAI_ENDPOINT=https://your-resource.openai.azure.com/
AZURE_DEPLOYMENT_NAME=your-gpt-4-deployment
DEFAULT_MODEL=your-gpt-4-deployment
```

### AWS Bedrock
```bash
# Setup Bedrock-specific environment
make setup-bedrock install-bedrock

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=bedrock
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=your-access-key-id
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=your-secret-access-key
BEDROCK_MODEL_ID=anthropic.claude-3-sonnet-20240229-v1:0
DEFAULT_MODEL=claude-3-sonnet
```

### OLLAMA (Local/Self-hosted)
```bash
# Setup OLLAMA environment
make setup-ollama install-ollama

# Start OLLAMA (if not running)
ollama serve

# Pull a model
ollama pull llama2:7b

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=ollama
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama2:7b
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434
DEFAULT_MODEL=llama2:7b
```

### Anthropic Claude
```bash
# Setup Anthropic environment
make setup-anthropic install-anthropic

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=anthropic
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your-anthropic-api-key
DEFAULT_MODEL=claude-3-sonnet-20240229
```

### Common Configuration
All providers support these settings:
```bash
# Gateway Settings (required)
MCP_GATEWAY_URL=http://localhost:4444
MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin --secret my-test-key)

# Agent Settings
TEMPERATURE=0.7
MAX_ITERATIONS=10
STREAMING_ENABLED=true
REQUEST_TIMEOUT=30

# Tool Settings (optional)
TOOLS=list-users,books-search  # Tool allowlist for production
```

## 🧪 Testing & Validation

### Health Checks
```bash
# Quick health verification
make health ready tools

# Or manually:
curl http://localhost:8000/health
curl http://localhost:8000/ready
curl http://localhost:8000/list_tools
```

### OpenAI-Compatible API Testing
```bash
# Basic chat completion
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "gpt-4o-mini",
    "messages": [
      {"role": "user", "content": "What tools do you have available?"}
    ]
  }'

# Streaming chat completion
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "gpt-4o-mini",
    "messages": [
      {"role": "user", "content": "Hello!"}
    ],
    "stream": true
  }'

# Use Makefile shortcuts
make test-chat
```

### A2A JSON-RPC Testing
```bash
# List available tools via A2A
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/a2a \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": "1",
    "method": "list_tools",
    "params": {}
  }'

# Invoke a specific tool via A2A
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/a2a \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": "1",
    "method": "invoke",
    "params": {
      "tool": "your-tool-name",
      "args": {"param": "value"}
    }
  }'

# Use Makefile shortcut
make test-a2a
```

**Expected A2A Response**:
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "1",
  "result": {
    "success": true,
    "output": "Tool execution result",
    "metadata": {
      "tool_id": "tool-id",
      "execution_time": 0.5
    }
  }
}
```

## 🛠️ Development

### Code Quality
```bash
# Run all quality checks
make lint

# Format code
make format

# Run tests
make test

# Full development workflow
make all
```

### Environment Validation
```bash
# Check configuration
make check-env

# Get example environment
make env-example
```

## 🐳 Docker Support

```bash
# Build Docker image
make docker-build

# Run with Docker
make docker-run
```

## 📊 Monitoring

The agent provides comprehensive monitoring endpoints:

- **Health Check**: `/health` - Basic service health
- **Readiness**: `/ready` - Kubernetes readiness probe
- **Tools**: `/list_tools` - Available tool inventory
- **Metrics**: Built-in request logging and performance tracking
![LangChain Agent Architecture](langchain-agent-architecture.png)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

agent_runtimes/langchain_agent/README.md, after:

# MCP LangChain Agent

A production-ready LangChain agent that integrates with the ContextForge, providing both OpenAI-compatible chat completions and A2A JSON-RPC endpoints for seamless AI agent communication.

## 🚀 Features

- **🔧 Dynamic Tool Discovery**: Automatically discovers and integrates tools from ContextForge
- **🤖 OpenAI-Compatible API**: Standard `/v1/chat/completions` endpoint with streaming support
- **🔄 A2A Communication**: JSON-RPC endpoint for agent-to-agent communication
- **🛡️ Security**: Configurable tool allowlists and authentication
- **📊 Observability**: Health checks, readiness probes, and comprehensive logging
- **⚡ Performance**: Async operations with connection pooling and timeouts
- **🎛️ Configuration**: Environment-based configuration with validation

## 🏗️ Architecture

The agent consists of several key components:

- **FastAPI Application** (`app.py`): Web server with OpenAI and A2A endpoints
- **LangChain Agent** (`agent_langchain.py`): Core AI agent with tool integration
- **MCP Client** (`mcp_client.py`): Gateway communication and tool discovery
- **Configuration** (`config.py`): Environment-based settings management
- **Models** (`models.py`): Pydantic models for API validation

## 📋 API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/health` | GET | Health check for monitoring |
| `/ready` | GET | Readiness check for Kubernetes |
| `/list_tools` | GET | Available tools from ContextForge |
| `/v1/chat/completions` | POST | OpenAI-compatible chat API |
| `/a2a` | POST | A2A JSON-RPC communication |

## ✅ User Stories Implemented

- [x] **Dynamic Tool Discovery** - Auto-discovers from gateway or uses allowlist
- [x] **Dual Endpoint Exposure** - OpenAI + A2A JSON-RPC endpoints
- [x] **Parameterized Tool Allow-List** - `TOOLS=` environment variable
- [x] **Tool Schema Introspection** - JSON schema parsing and validation
- [x] **Production Ready** - Comprehensive testing, linting, and deployment tools
- [x] **Modern Development** - pyproject.toml, Makefile, pre-commit hooks

Structure:
```
agent_runtimes/langchain_agent/
├── app.py                    # FastAPI application incl. /v1/chat/completions and /a2a
├── agent_langchain.py    # Core Langchain agent
├── mcp_client.py            # ContextForge client
├── models.py                # Pydantic models
├── config.py                # Configuration management
├── start_agent.py           # Startup script
├── requirements.txt         # Dependencies
└── README.md               # This file
```

### Configuration (env vars)
- OPENAI_API_KEY – required
- MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN – JWT for the gateway


## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.10 or higher
- OpenAI API key
- Running ContextForge instance

### Installation

**Option 1: Development Setup (Recommended)**
```bash
cd agent_runtimes/langchain_agent

# Install in development mode with all tools
make install-dev

# Setup environment from template
make setup-env

# Edit .env with your configuration
editor .env
```

**Option 2: Production Setup**
```bash
cd agent_runtimes/langchain_agent

# Install production dependencies only
pip install -e .

# Create environment file
cp .env.example .env
editor .env
```

### Configuration
1) Start the ContextForge (from project root):
```bash
make serve
```

### Development Workflow

**1. Start the ContextForge** (from project root):
```bash
make serve
```

**2. Start the LangChain Agent** (in another terminal):
```bash
cd agent_runtimes/langchain_agent

# Development mode with auto-reload
make dev

# Or production mode
make run
```

**3. Verify everything is working**:
```bash
# Check status
make status

# Health checks
make health ready tools
```

## 🤖 Multi-LLM Provider Support

The agent supports multiple LLM providers. Choose your preferred provider and configure accordingly:

### OpenAI (Default)
```bash
# Setup and install
make setup-env install-dev

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=openai
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-api-key
DEFAULT_MODEL=gpt-4o-mini
```

### Azure OpenAI
```bash
# Setup Azure-specific environment
make setup-azure install-azure

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=azure
AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY=your-azure-api-key
AZURE_OPENAI_ENDPOINT=https://your-resource.openai.azure.com/
AZURE_DEPLOYMENT_NAME=your-gpt-4-deployment
DEFAULT_MODEL=your-gpt-4-deployment
```

### AWS Bedrock
```bash
# Setup Bedrock-specific environment
make setup-bedrock install-bedrock

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=bedrock
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=your-access-key-id
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=your-secret-access-key
BEDROCK_MODEL_ID=anthropic.claude-3-sonnet-20240229-v1:0
DEFAULT_MODEL=claude-3-sonnet
```

### OLLAMA (Local/Self-hosted)
```bash
# Setup OLLAMA environment
make setup-ollama install-ollama

# Start OLLAMA (if not running)
ollama serve

# Pull a model
ollama pull llama2:7b

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=ollama
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama2:7b
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434
DEFAULT_MODEL=llama2:7b
```

### Anthropic Claude
```bash
# Setup Anthropic environment
make setup-anthropic install-anthropic

# Configure .env
LLM_PROVIDER=anthropic
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your-anthropic-api-key
DEFAULT_MODEL=claude-3-sonnet-20240229
```

### Common Configuration
All providers support these settings:
```bash
# Gateway Settings (required)
MCP_GATEWAY_URL=http://localhost:4444
MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin --secret my-test-key)

# Agent Settings
TEMPERATURE=0.7
MAX_ITERATIONS=10
STREAMING_ENABLED=true
REQUEST_TIMEOUT=30

# Tool Settings (optional)
TOOLS=list-users,books-search  # Tool allowlist for production
```

## 🧪 Testing & Validation

### Health Checks
```bash
# Quick health verification
make health ready tools

# Or manually:
curl http://localhost:8000/health
curl http://localhost:8000/ready
curl http://localhost:8000/list_tools
```

### OpenAI-Compatible API Testing
```bash
# Basic chat completion
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "gpt-4o-mini",
    "messages": [
      {"role": "user", "content": "What tools do you have available?"}
    ]
  }'

# Streaming chat completion
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "gpt-4o-mini",
    "messages": [
      {"role": "user", "content": "Hello!"}
    ],
    "stream": true
  }'

# Use Makefile shortcuts
make test-chat
```

### A2A JSON-RPC Testing
```bash
# List available tools via A2A
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/a2a \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": "1",
    "method": "list_tools",
    "params": {}
  }'

# Invoke a specific tool via A2A
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/a2a \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": "1",
    "method": "invoke",
    "params": {
      "tool": "your-tool-name",
      "args": {"param": "value"}
    }
  }'

# Use Makefile shortcut
make test-a2a
```

**Expected A2A Response**:
```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": "1",
  "result": {
    "success": true,
    "output": "Tool execution result",
    "metadata": {
      "tool_id": "tool-id",
      "execution_time": 0.5
    }
  }
}
```

## 🛠️ Development

### Code Quality
```bash
# Run all quality checks
make lint

# Format code
make format

# Run tests
make test

# Full development workflow
make all
```

### Environment Validation
```bash
# Check configuration
make check-env

# Get example environment
make env-example
```

## 🐳 Docker Support

```bash
# Build Docker image
make docker-build

# Run with Docker
make docker-run
```

## 📊 Monitoring

The agent provides comprehensive monitoring endpoints:

- **Health Check**: `/health` - Basic service health
- **Readiness**: `/ready` - Kubernetes readiness probe
- **Tools**: `/list_tools` - Available tool inventory
- **Metrics**: Built-in request logging and performance tracking
![LangChain Agent Architecture](langchain-agent-architecture.png)
