docs/docs/api/orchestrate.md, before:

# Orchestrate API — Cancellation

## POST /orchestrate/cancel
Request cancellation for a long-running tool execution (gateway-authoritative).

Request body (application/json):

{
  "requestId": "<string>",
  "reason": "<string|null>"
}

Response 200 (application/json):

{
  "status": "cancelled" | "queued",
  "requestId": "<string>",
  "reason": "<string|null>"
}

Notes:
- The gateway will attempt to cancel a local run if registered and will broadcast a JSON-RPC notification to connected sessions:
```
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"notifications/cancelled","params":{"requestId":"<id>","reason":"<reason>"}}
```
- `status == "cancelled"` indicates the gateway found the run locally and attempted cancellation.
- `status == "queued"` indicates the gateway did not find the run locally but broadcasted the notification for remote peers to handle.

Permissions: `admin.system_config` by default (RBAC). Adjust as appropriate for your deployment.

## GET /orchestrate/status/{request_id}
Query the status of a registered tool execution run.

Path parameters:
- `request_id` (string, required): The unique identifier of the run to query

Response 200 (application/json):

{
  "name": "<string|null>",
  "registered_at": <float>,
  "cancelled": <boolean>,
  "cancelled_at": <float|null>,
  "cancel_reason": "<string|null>"
}

Response 404 (application/json):

{
  "detail": "Run not found"
}

Notes:
- Returns the current status of a registered run including cancellation state
- `registered_at` is a Unix timestamp (seconds since epoch)
- `cancelled_at` is present only if the run has been cancelled
- `cancel_reason` contains the reason provided during cancellation (if any)

Permissions: `admin.system_config` by default (RBAC). Adjust as appropriate for your deployment.

## Implementation Details

### Tool Registration

Tool executions are automatically registered for cancellation tracking in the following scenarios:

1. **JSON-RPC `tools/call` requests**: All tool invocations via the JSON-RPC protocol are registered with their request ID for cancellation support
2. **LLMChat service**: Tool executions initiated through the `/llmchat/chat` endpoint with LangChain agents are also registered

### Multi-Worker Support (Redis Pubsub)

The orchestration service supports multi-worker deployments through Redis pubsub:

- Cancellation requests are published to the `orchestration:cancel` Redis channel
- All workers subscribe to this channel and process cancellation events
- This ensures cancellations propagate across the entire cluster, not just the local worker
- The service automatically initializes Redis pubsub on startup if Redis is configured

### Actual Task Interruption

The implementation provides **real task cancellation** beyond just marking runs as cancelled:

- Tool executions are wrapped in `asyncio.Task` objects
- The cancel callback invokes `task.cancel()` to immediately interrupt the running task
- Cancelled tasks raise `asyncio.CancelledError`, which is caught and converted to a JSON-RPC error response
- This provides immediate interruption of long-running tool executions

### Cancellation Semantics

Cancellation follows the MCP specification with enhanced implementation:

- The gateway marks the run as cancelled and invokes the registered callback
- The callback performs actual task cancellation via `asyncio.Task.cancel()`
- A `notifications/cancelled` broadcast is sent to all connected sessions
- For tools forwarded to external MCP servers, the broadcast allows those servers to handle cancellation
- Cancellation is **best-effort** but provides immediate interruption for local tool executions

### Error Handling

- Broadcast errors to individual sessions are logged but don't prevent cancellation
- Failed Redis pubsub operations are logged as warnings but don't block local cancellation
- Cancelled tasks return a JSON-RPC error with code `-32800` and details about the cancellation

Commit message:

Make tool cancellation optional via .env variable
Signed-off-by: Mohan Lakshmaiah <mohalaks@in.ibm.com>

docs/docs/api/orchestrate.md, after:

# Orchestrate API — Cancellation

> **Configuration:** This feature is controlled by the `MCPGATEWAY_TOOL_CANCELLATION_ENABLED`
> environment variable (default: `true`). When disabled, these endpoints will return 404
> and tool executions will not be tracked for cancellation.

## Configuration

```bash
# Enable tool cancellation (default)
MCPGATEWAY_TOOL_CANCELLATION_ENABLED=true

# Disable tool cancellation
MCPGATEWAY_TOOL_CANCELLATION_ENABLED=false
```

When disabled:
- `POST /orchestrate/cancel` returns 404
- `GET /orchestrate/status/{id}` returns 404
- Tool executions are not registered for cancellation
- No overhead from cancellation tracking

## POST /orchestrate/cancel
Request cancellation for a long-running tool execution (gateway-authoritative).

Request body (application/json):

{
  "requestId": "<string>",
  "reason": "<string|null>"
}

Response 200 (application/json):

{
  "status": "cancelled" | "queued",
  "requestId": "<string>",
  "reason": "<string|null>"
}

Notes:
- The gateway will attempt to cancel a local run if registered and will broadcast a JSON-RPC notification to connected sessions:
```
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","method":"notifications/cancelled","params":{"requestId":"<id>","reason":"<reason>"}}
```
- `status == "cancelled"` indicates the gateway found the run locally and attempted cancellation.
- `status == "queued"` indicates the gateway did not find the run locally but broadcasted the notification for remote peers to handle.

Permissions: `admin.system_config` by default (RBAC). Adjust as appropriate for your deployment.

## GET /orchestrate/status/{request_id}
Query the status of a registered tool execution run.

Path parameters:
- `request_id` (string, required): The unique identifier of the run to query

Response 200 (application/json):

{
  "name": "<string|null>",
  "registered_at": <float>,
  "cancelled": <boolean>,
  "cancelled_at": <float|null>,
  "cancel_reason": "<string|null>"
}

Response 404 (application/json):

{
  "detail": "Run not found"
}

Notes:
- Returns the current status of a registered run including cancellation state
- `registered_at` is a Unix timestamp (seconds since epoch)
- `cancelled_at` is present only if the run has been cancelled
- `cancel_reason` contains the reason provided during cancellation (if any)

Permissions: `admin.system_config` by default (RBAC). Adjust as appropriate for your deployment.

## Implementation Details

### Tool Registration

Tool executions are automatically registered for cancellation tracking in the following scenarios:

1. **JSON-RPC `tools/call` requests**: All tool invocations via the JSON-RPC protocol are registered with their request ID for cancellation support
2. **LLMChat service**: Tool executions initiated through the `/llmchat/chat` endpoint with LangChain agents are also registered

### Multi-Worker Support (Redis Pubsub)

The orchestration service supports multi-worker deployments through Redis pubsub:

- Cancellation requests are published to the `orchestration:cancel` Redis channel
- All workers subscribe to this channel and process cancellation events
- This ensures cancellations propagate across the entire cluster, not just the local worker
- The service automatically initializes Redis pubsub on startup if Redis is configured

### Actual Task Interruption

The implementation provides **real task cancellation** beyond just marking runs as cancelled:

- Tool executions are wrapped in `asyncio.Task` objects
- The cancel callback invokes `task.cancel()` to immediately interrupt the running task
- Cancelled tasks raise `asyncio.CancelledError`, which is caught and converted to a JSON-RPC error response
- This provides immediate interruption of long-running tool executions

### Cancellation Semantics

Cancellation follows the MCP specification with enhanced implementation:

- The gateway marks the run as cancelled and invokes the registered callback
- The callback performs actual task cancellation via `asyncio.Task.cancel()`
- A `notifications/cancelled` broadcast is sent to all connected sessions
- For tools forwarded to external MCP servers, the broadcast allows those servers to handle cancellation
- Cancellation is **best-effort** but provides immediate interruption for local tool executions

### Error Handling

- Broadcast errors to individual sessions are logged but don't prevent cancellation
- Failed Redis pubsub operations are logged as warnings but don't block local cancellation
- Cancelled tasks return a JSON-RPC error with code `-32800` and details about the cancellation
