tools_rust/wrapper/README.md, before:

# mcp-stdio-wrapper

This project is a pipeline-oriented command-line tool designed to process data. It reads input from standard in (`stdin`), processes this data concurrently using a system of workers, and then writes the results to standard out (`stdout`).

The core functionality involves an `McpStreamClient` (defined in `src/streamer.rs`) which is used by `mcp_workers.rs` to send processed data to an external service. It also handles receiving Server-Sent Events (SSE) in response from this external service. The application's configuration is managed through `src/config.rs`, which integrates settings from command-line arguments and environment variables.

## Collaboration Diagram

Here is a high-level overview of the module collaboration:

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Input"
        A[stdio_reader]
    end
    subgraph "Processing"
        B[main.rs]
        C[mcp_workers]
        D[mcp_client]
        E[streamer]
    end
    subgraph "Output"
        F[stdio_writer]
    end
    subgraph "Configuration"
        G[config.rs]
        H[config_from_cli.rs]
        I[config_from_env.rs]
        J[config_defaults.rs]
    end

    A -- "data" --> B
    B -- "spawns" --> C
    B -- "spawns" --> A
    B -- "spawns" --> F
    C -- "uses" --> D
    D -- "uses" --> E
    C -- "results" --> F

    B -- "uses" --> G
    G -- "uses" --> H
    G -- "uses" --> I
    G -- "uses" --> J
```

## Logic Diagram

Here is a diagram showing the logic of the utility:

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Input"
        A[stdin] --> B(stdio_reader);
    end
    subgraph "Processing Pipeline"
        B --> C{Input Channel};
        C --> D1(Worker 1);
        C --> D2(Worker 2);
        C --> D3(...);
        C --> Dn(Worker N);
        D1 --> E{MCP Server};
        D2 --> E;
        D3 --> E;
        Dn --> E;
        E --> F1(Worker 1);
        E --> F2(Worker 2);
        E --> F3(...);
        E --> Fn(Worker N);
        F1 --> G{Output Channel};
        F2 --> G;
        F3 --> G;
        Fn --> G;
    end
    subgraph "Output"
        G --> H(stdio_writer);
        H --> I[stdout];
    end
```
## Testing

To verify the functionality of the `mcp-stdio-wrapper`, you can use the provided test scripts in the `scripts/` directory.
Start gateway with:
```
make compose-up
```
before running test scripts.

### `test-fast-time-curl.sh`

This script directly interacts with the virtual server of the MCP Gateway using `curl`. It's useful for verifying that the MCP Gateway is running and responding as expected.

```bash
./scripts/test-fast-time-curl.sh
```

### `test-fast-time-wrapper.sh`

By default, the test scripts run against the release version of the `mcp-stdio-wrapper`. If you need to test a development version, you must update the executable path within the relevant test script to point to your development build.

This script utilizes the `mcp-stdio-wrapper` to send requests to the MCP Gateway. It demonstrates how the wrapper processes input and communicates with the gateway.

```bash
./scripts/test-fast-time-wrapper.sh
```


```

**Note** Update the PORT and SERVER_ID variables at the top of each script to match your environment, or set them as environment variables before execution.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

tools_rust/wrapper/README.md, after:

# mcp-stdio-wrapper

This project is a pipeline-oriented command-line tool designed to process data. It reads input from standard in (`stdin`), processes this data concurrently using a system of workers, and then writes the results to standard out (`stdout`).

The core functionality involves an `McpStreamClient` (defined in `src/streamer.rs`) which is used by `mcp_workers.rs` to send processed data to an external service. It also handles receiving Server-Sent Events (SSE) in response from this external service. The application's configuration is managed through `src/config.rs`, which integrates settings from command-line arguments and environment variables.

## Collaboration Diagram

Here is a high-level overview of the module collaboration:

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Input"
        A[stdio_reader]
    end
    subgraph "Processing"
        B[main.rs]
        C[mcp_workers]
        D[mcp_client]
        E[streamer]
    end
    subgraph "Output"
        F[stdio_writer]
    end
    subgraph "Configuration"
        G[config.rs]
        H[config_from_cli.rs]
        I[config_from_env.rs]
        J[config_defaults.rs]
    end

    A -- "data" --> B
    B -- "spawns" --> C
    B -- "spawns" --> A
    B -- "spawns" --> F
    C -- "uses" --> D
    D -- "uses" --> E
    C -- "results" --> F

    B -- "uses" --> G
    G -- "uses" --> H
    G -- "uses" --> I
    G -- "uses" --> J
```

## Logic Diagram

Here is a diagram showing the logic of the utility:

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Input"
        A[stdin] --> B(stdio_reader);
    end
    subgraph "Processing Pipeline"
        B --> C{Input Channel};
        C --> D1(Worker 1);
        C --> D2(Worker 2);
        C --> D3(...);
        C --> Dn(Worker N);
        D1 --> E{MCP Server};
        D2 --> E;
        D3 --> E;
        Dn --> E;
        E --> F1(Worker 1);
        E --> F2(Worker 2);
        E --> F3(...);
        E --> Fn(Worker N);
        F1 --> G{Output Channel};
        F2 --> G;
        F3 --> G;
        Fn --> G;
    end
    subgraph "Output"
        G --> H(stdio_writer);
        H --> I[stdout];
    end
```
## Testing

To verify the functionality of the `mcp-stdio-wrapper`, you can use the provided test scripts in the `scripts/` directory.
Start gateway with:
```
make compose-up
```
before running test scripts.

### `test-fast-time-curl.sh`

This script directly interacts with the virtual server of the ContextForge using `curl`. It's useful for verifying that the ContextForge is running and responding as expected.

```bash
./scripts/test-fast-time-curl.sh
```

### `test-fast-time-wrapper.sh`

By default, the test scripts run against the release version of the `mcp-stdio-wrapper`. If you need to test a development version, you must update the executable path within the relevant test script to point to your development build.

This script utilizes the `mcp-stdio-wrapper` to send requests to the ContextForge. It demonstrates how the wrapper processes input and communicates with the gateway.

```bash
./scripts/test-fast-time-wrapper.sh
```


```

**Note** Update the PORT and SERVER_ID variables at the top of each script to match your environment, or set them as environment variables before execution.
