docs/docs/using/clients/cline.md, before:

# Cline (VS Code Extension)

[Cline](https://cline.bot/) is a Visual Studio Code extension that brings AI-powered coding assistance directly into your editor. It supports the Model Context Protocol (MCP), enabling seamless integration with MCP-compatible servers like MCP Gateway.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

## 🧰 Key Features

- **AI-Powered Coding**: Leverages advanced AI models (e.g., Claude 3.5 Sonnet, DeepSeek Chat) for code generation, editing, and debugging.
- **MCP Integration**: Connects to MCP servers to discover and utilize tools dynamically.
- **Terminal and Browser Access**: Executes terminal commands and performs browser operations with user permission.
- **Custom Tools**: Supports adding custom tools via MCP for extended functionality.

---

## 🛠 Installation

1. **Install Cline Extension**:

   - Open VS Code.
   - Navigate to the Extensions view (`Ctrl+Shift+X` or `Cmd+Shift+X`).
   - Search for "Cline" and click "Install".

2. **Sign In to Cline**:

   - Click the Cline icon in the Activity Bar.
   - Follow the prompts to sign in or create a new account at [app.cline.bot](https://app.cline.bot/).
   - New users receive free credits; no credit card required.

---

## 🔗 Connecting to MCP Gateway

To integrate Cline with your MCP Gateway:

1. **Configure MCP Server**:

   - Open the Cline settings in VS Code.
   - Navigate to the MCP Servers section.
   - Add a new MCP server with the following configuration under mcpServers as shown below:

     ```json
     "mcpServers": {
         "mcpgateway-wrapper": {
            "disabled": true,
            "timeout": 60,
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "uv",
            "args": [
            "run",
            "--directory",
            "REPLACE_WITH_PATH_TO_REPO",
            "-m",
            "mcpgateway.wrapper"
            ],
            "env": {
               "MCP_SERVER_URL": "http://localhost:4444",
               "MCP_AUTH": "Bearer REPLACE_WITH_MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN",
               "MCP_WRAPPER_LOG_LEVEL": "OFF"
            }
         }
      }
     ```

2. **Enable the MCP Server**:

   - Ensure the newly added MCP server is enabled in the Cline settings.

3. **Verify Connection**:

   - In the Cline interface, navigate to the MCP Servers section.
   - Confirm that the MCP Gateway server is listed and shows a green status indicator.

---

## 🧪 Using MCP Tools in Cline

Once connected:

- **Discover Tools**: Cline will automatically fetch and list available tools from the MCP Gateway.
- **Invoke Tools**: Use natural language prompts in Cline to invoke tools. For example:

  - "Run the `hello_world` tool with the argument `name: Alice`."

- **Monitor Responses**: Cline will display the tool's output directly within the chat interface.

---

## 📝 Tips for Effective Use

- **.clinerules File**: Create a `.clinerules` file in your project root to define project-specific behaviors and instructions for Cline.
- **Custom Instructions**: Utilize Cline's Custom Instructions feature to tailor its behavior across all projects.
- **Model Selection**: Choose the AI model that best fits your project's needs within the Cline settings.

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [Cline Official Website](https://cline.bot/)
- [Cline Documentation](https://docs.cline.bot/)

---

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/clients/cline.md, after:

# Cline (VS Code Extension)

[Cline](https://cline.bot/) is a Visual Studio Code extension that brings AI-powered coding assistance directly into your editor. It supports the Model Context Protocol (MCP), enabling seamless integration with MCP-compatible servers like ContextForge.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

## 🧰 Key Features

- **AI-Powered Coding**: Leverages advanced AI models (e.g., Claude 3.5 Sonnet, DeepSeek Chat) for code generation, editing, and debugging.
- **MCP Integration**: Connects to MCP servers to discover and utilize tools dynamically.
- **Terminal and Browser Access**: Executes terminal commands and performs browser operations with user permission.
- **Custom Tools**: Supports adding custom tools via MCP for extended functionality.

---

## 🛠 Installation

1. **Install Cline Extension**:

   - Open VS Code.
   - Navigate to the Extensions view (`Ctrl+Shift+X` or `Cmd+Shift+X`).
   - Search for "Cline" and click "Install".

2. **Sign In to Cline**:

   - Click the Cline icon in the Activity Bar.
   - Follow the prompts to sign in or create a new account at [app.cline.bot](https://app.cline.bot/).
   - New users receive free credits; no credit card required.

---

## 🔗 Connecting to ContextForge

To integrate Cline with your ContextForge:

1. **Configure MCP Server**:

   - Open the Cline settings in VS Code.
   - Navigate to the MCP Servers section.
   - Add a new MCP server with the following configuration under mcpServers as shown below:

     ```json
     "mcpServers": {
         "mcpgateway-wrapper": {
            "disabled": true,
            "timeout": 60,
            "type": "stdio",
            "command": "uv",
            "args": [
            "run",
            "--directory",
            "REPLACE_WITH_PATH_TO_REPO",
            "-m",
            "mcpgateway.wrapper"
            ],
            "env": {
               "MCP_SERVER_URL": "http://localhost:4444",
               "MCP_AUTH": "Bearer REPLACE_WITH_MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN",
               "MCP_WRAPPER_LOG_LEVEL": "OFF"
            }
         }
      }
     ```

2. **Enable the MCP Server**:

   - Ensure the newly added MCP server is enabled in the Cline settings.

3. **Verify Connection**:

   - In the Cline interface, navigate to the MCP Servers section.
   - Confirm that the ContextForge server is listed and shows a green status indicator.

---

## 🧪 Using MCP Tools in Cline

Once connected:

- **Discover Tools**: Cline will automatically fetch and list available tools from the ContextForge.
- **Invoke Tools**: Use natural language prompts in Cline to invoke tools. For example:

  - "Run the `hello_world` tool with the argument `name: Alice`."

- **Monitor Responses**: Cline will display the tool's output directly within the chat interface.

---

## 📝 Tips for Effective Use

- **.clinerules File**: Create a `.clinerules` file in your project root to define project-specific behaviors and instructions for Cline.
- **Custom Instructions**: Utilize Cline's Custom Instructions feature to tailor its behavior across all projects.
- **Model Selection**: Choose the AI model that best fits your project's needs within the Cline settings.

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [Cline Official Website](https://cline.bot/)
- [Cline Documentation](https://docs.cline.bot/)

---
