docs/docs/using/clients/continue.md, before:

# Continue (VS Code Extension)

[Continue](https://www.continue.dev/) is an open-source AI code assistant for Visual Studio
Code.
Because it speaks the **Model Context Protocol (MCP)**, Continue can discover and call the
tools you publish through **MCP Gateway** - no plug-in code required.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

## 🧰 Key Features

* ✨ **AI-powered completions, edits & chat**
* 🔌 **MCP integration** - dynamic tool list pulled from your gateway
* 🏗 **Bring-your-own model** - local Ollama, OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.
* 🧠 **Context-aware** - reads your workspace to craft better replies

---

## 🛠 Installation

1. **Install "Continue"**: `Ctrl ⇧ X` → search *Continue* → **Install**
2. **Open config**: `Ctrl ⇧ P` → *"Continue: Open Config"*
   → edits **`~/.continue/config.json`**

---

## 🔗 Connecting Continue to MCP Gateway

There are **two ways** to attach Continue to a gateway:

| Transport | When to use | Snippet |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| **SSE (HTTP)** | Remote / SSL / no local process | `<-- see Option A>` |
| **Stdio wrapper** | Local dev, no SSE, or auth-header issues | `<-- see Option B>` |

> For both options you still need a **JWT** or Basic auth if the gateway is protected.

### Option A - Direct SSE

```jsonc
// ~/.continue/config.json
{
  "experimental": {
    "modelContextProtocolServer": {
      "transport": {
        "type": "sse",
        "url": "http://localhost:4444/servers/UUID_OF_SERVER_1/sse",
        "headers": {
          "Authorization": "Bearer ${env:MCP_AUTH}"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

*Generate a token*:

```bash
export MCP_AUTH=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)
```

### Option B - Local stdio bridge (`mcpgateway.wrapper`)

1. **Install the wrapper** (pipx keeps it isolated):

```bash
pipx install --include-deps mcp-contextforge-gateway
```

2. **Config in Continue**:

```jsonc
{
  "experimental": {
    "modelContextProtocolServer": {
      "transport": {
        "type": "stdio",
        "command": "python3",
        "args": ["-m", "mcpgateway.wrapper"],
        "env": {
          "MCP_SERVER_URL": "http://localhost:4444/servers/UUID_OF_SERVER_1",
          "MCP_AUTH": "Bearer ${env:MCP_AUTH}",
          "MCP_TOOL_CALL_TIMEOUT": "120"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> If you prefer Docker:<br/>
> replace `"command": "python3"` with `"command": "docker"` and use the same container
> arguments shown in the Copilot docs.

---

## 🧪 Using Gateway Tools

Once VS Code restarts:

1. Open **Continue Chat** (`⌥ C` on macOS / `Alt C` on Windows/Linux)
2. Click **Tools** - your gateway's tools should appear
3. Chat naturally:

   ```
   Run hello_world with name = "Alice"
   ```

   The wrapper/Gateway executes and streams the JSON result back to Continue.

---

## 📝 Tips

* **SSE vs stdio** - SSE is simpler in prod, stdio is great for offline or
  header-free environments.

* **Multiple servers** - add more blocks under `"servers"` if you run staging vs prod.
* **Custom instructions** - Continue's *Custom Instructions* pane lets you steer tool use.

---

## 📚 Resources

* 🌐 [Continue docs](https://docs.continue.dev/)
* 📖 [MCP Spec](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
* 🛠 [MCP Gateway GitHub](https://github.com/ibm/mcp-context-forge)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/clients/continue.md, after:

# Continue (VS Code Extension)

[Continue](https://www.continue.dev/) is an open-source AI code assistant for Visual Studio
Code.
Because it speaks the **Model Context Protocol (MCP)**, Continue can discover and call the
tools you publish through **ContextForge** - no plug-in code required.

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

## 🧰 Key Features

* ✨ **AI-powered completions, edits & chat**
* 🔌 **MCP integration** - dynamic tool list pulled from your gateway
* 🏗 **Bring-your-own model** - local Ollama, OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.
* 🧠 **Context-aware** - reads your workspace to craft better replies

---

## 🛠 Installation

1. **Install "Continue"**: `Ctrl ⇧ X` → search *Continue* → **Install**
2. **Open config**: `Ctrl ⇧ P` → *"Continue: Open Config"*
   → edits **`~/.continue/config.json`**

---

## 🔗 Connecting Continue to ContextForge

There are **two ways** to attach Continue to a gateway:

| Transport | When to use | Snippet |
|-----------|-------------|---------|
| **SSE (HTTP)** | Remote / SSL / no local process | `<-- see Option A>` |
| **Stdio wrapper** | Local dev, no SSE, or auth-header issues | `<-- see Option B>` |

> For both options you still need a **JWT** or Basic auth if the gateway is protected.

### Option A - Direct SSE

```jsonc
// ~/.continue/config.json
{
  "experimental": {
    "modelContextProtocolServer": {
      "transport": {
        "type": "sse",
        "url": "http://localhost:4444/servers/UUID_OF_SERVER_1/sse",
        "headers": {
          "Authorization": "Bearer ${env:MCP_AUTH}"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

*Generate a token*:

```bash
export MCP_AUTH=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)
```

### Option B - Local stdio bridge (`mcpgateway.wrapper`)

1. **Install the wrapper** (pipx keeps it isolated):

```bash
pipx install --include-deps mcp-contextforge-gateway
```

2. **Config in Continue**:

```jsonc
{
  "experimental": {
    "modelContextProtocolServer": {
      "transport": {
        "type": "stdio",
        "command": "python3",
        "args": ["-m", "mcpgateway.wrapper"],
        "env": {
          "MCP_SERVER_URL": "http://localhost:4444/servers/UUID_OF_SERVER_1",
          "MCP_AUTH": "Bearer ${env:MCP_AUTH}",
          "MCP_TOOL_CALL_TIMEOUT": "120"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> If you prefer Docker:<br/>
> replace `"command": "python3"` with `"command": "docker"` and use the same container
> arguments shown in the Copilot docs.

---

## 🧪 Using Gateway Tools

Once VS Code restarts:

1. Open **Continue Chat** (`⌥ C` on macOS / `Alt C` on Windows/Linux)
2. Click **Tools** - your gateway's tools should appear
3. Chat naturally:

   ```
   Run hello_world with name = "Alice"
   ```

   The wrapper/Gateway executes and streams the JSON result back to Continue.

---

## 📝 Tips

* **SSE vs stdio** - SSE is simpler in prod, stdio is great for offline or
  header-free environments.

* **Multiple servers** - add more blocks under `"servers"` if you run staging vs prod.
* **Custom instructions** - Continue's *Custom Instructions* pane lets you steer tool use.

---

## 📚 Resources

* 🌐 [Continue docs](https://docs.continue.dev/)
* 📖 [MCP Spec](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
* 🛠 [ContextForge GitHub](https://github.com/ibm/mcp-context-forge)
