docs/docs/using/clients/openwebui.md, before:

# OpenWebUI Integration with MCP Gateway

OpenWebUI is a self-hosted, extensible interface for interacting with large language models (LLMs). Integrating OpenWebUI with the Model Context Protocol (MCP) allows you to enhance your AI workflows by leveraging tools and resources provided by MCP servers.

---

## 🔌 Integration Overview

OpenWebUI supports integration with external tools via OpenAPI specifications. MCP Gateway exposes its tools through OpenAPI-compatible endpoints, enabling seamless integration with OpenWebUI.

---

## 🛠️ Prerequisites

- **OpenWebUI**: Ensure you have OpenWebUI installed and running. Refer to the [OpenWebUI documentation](https://docs.openwebui.com/) for installation instructions.
- **MCP Gateway**: Set up and run the MCP Gateway. Detailed setup instructions can be found in the [MCP Gateway documentation](https://ibm.github.io/mcp-context-forge/).

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

## 🔗 Connecting MCP Tools to OpenWebUI

### 1. Launch MCP Gateway

Start the MCP Gateway to expose its tools via OpenAPI endpoints. For example:

```bash
uv run mcpgateway
```

Ensure that the MCP Gateway is accessible at a known URL, such as `http://localhost:4444` (or `http://localhost:8080` with Compose).

### 2. Identify MCP Tool Endpoints

Determine the specific tool endpoints provided by the MCP Gateway. These endpoints follow the OpenAPI specification and are typically accessible at URLs like:

```
http://localhost:4444/tools/<tool-name>
```

Replace `<tool-name>` with the actual name of the tool you wish to integrate.

### 3. Add MCP Tools to OpenWebUI

#### a. Access OpenWebUI Settings

* Navigate to the OpenWebUI interface in your browser.
* Click on the ⚙️ **Settings** icon.

#### b. Add a New Tool Server

* In the **Settings** menu, locate the **Tools** section.
* Click on the ➕ **Add Tool Server** button.
* Enter the URL of the MCP tool endpoint (e.g., `http://localhost:4444/tools/<tool-name>` or `http://localhost:8080/tools/<tool-name>` with Compose).
* Click **Save** to register the tool.

Repeat this process for each MCP tool you wish to integrate.

---

## 🧪 Using MCP Tools in OpenWebUI

Once the MCP tools are registered:

* **Enable Tools in Chat**: In the chat interface, click on the ➕ icon to view available tools. Toggle the desired MCP tools to enable them for the current session.
* **Invoke Tools**: Interact with the AI model as usual. When appropriate, the model will utilize the enabled MCP tools to fulfill your requests.

---

## ⚙️ Advanced Configuration

### Global Tool Servers

To make MCP tools available to all users:

* Navigate to **Admin Settings** > **Tools**.
* Add the MCP tool endpoints as described above.
* These tools will now be accessible to all users, subject to individual activation in their chat sessions.

### Native Function Calling

OpenWebUI supports native function calling for tools:

* In the chat interface, go to **Chat Controls** > **Advanced Params**.
* Set the **Function Calling** parameter to `Native`.
* This enables more structured interactions between the AI model and the tools.

---

## 🧰 Additional Resources

* [OpenWebUI Documentation](https://docs.openwebui.com/)
* [MCP Gateway Documentation](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
* [OpenWebUI GitHub Repository](https://github.com/open-webui/open-webui)
* [MCP Gateway GitHub Repository](https://github.com/mcp-ecosystem/mcp-gateway)

---

By integrating MCP tools into OpenWebUI, you can enhance your AI assistant's capabilities, enabling it to perform a wider range of tasks by leveraging the diverse tools provided by the MCP ecosystem.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/clients/openwebui.md, after:

# OpenWebUI Integration with ContextForge

OpenWebUI is a self-hosted, extensible interface for interacting with large language models (LLMs). Integrating OpenWebUI with the Model Context Protocol (MCP) allows you to enhance your AI workflows by leveraging tools and resources provided by MCP servers.

---

## 🔌 Integration Overview

OpenWebUI supports integration with external tools via OpenAPI specifications. ContextForge exposes its tools through OpenAPI-compatible endpoints, enabling seamless integration with OpenWebUI.

---

## 🛠️ Prerequisites

- **OpenWebUI**: Ensure you have OpenWebUI installed and running. Refer to the [OpenWebUI documentation](https://docs.openwebui.com/) for installation instructions.
- **ContextForge**: Set up and run the ContextForge. Detailed setup instructions can be found in the [ContextForge documentation](https://ibm.github.io/mcp-context-forge/).

!!! tip "Gateway URL"
    - Direct installs (`uvx`, pip, or `docker run`): `http://localhost:4444`
    - Docker Compose (nginx proxy): `http://localhost:8080`

---

## 🔗 Connecting MCP Tools to OpenWebUI

### 1. Launch ContextForge

Start the ContextForge to expose its tools via OpenAPI endpoints. For example:

```bash
uv run mcpgateway
```

Ensure that the ContextForge is accessible at a known URL, such as `http://localhost:4444` (or `http://localhost:8080` with Compose).

### 2. Identify MCP Tool Endpoints

Determine the specific tool endpoints provided by the ContextForge. These endpoints follow the OpenAPI specification and are typically accessible at URLs like:

```
http://localhost:4444/tools/<tool-name>
```

Replace `<tool-name>` with the actual name of the tool you wish to integrate.

### 3. Add MCP Tools to OpenWebUI

#### a. Access OpenWebUI Settings

* Navigate to the OpenWebUI interface in your browser.
* Click on the ⚙️ **Settings** icon.

#### b. Add a New Tool Server

* In the **Settings** menu, locate the **Tools** section.
* Click on the ➕ **Add Tool Server** button.
* Enter the URL of the MCP tool endpoint (e.g., `http://localhost:4444/tools/<tool-name>` or `http://localhost:8080/tools/<tool-name>` with Compose).
* Click **Save** to register the tool.

Repeat this process for each MCP tool you wish to integrate.

---

## 🧪 Using MCP Tools in OpenWebUI

Once the MCP tools are registered:

* **Enable Tools in Chat**: In the chat interface, click on the ➕ icon to view available tools. Toggle the desired MCP tools to enable them for the current session.
* **Invoke Tools**: Interact with the AI model as usual. When appropriate, the model will utilize the enabled MCP tools to fulfill your requests.

---

## ⚙️ Advanced Configuration

### Global Tool Servers

To make MCP tools available to all users:

* Navigate to **Admin Settings** > **Tools**.
* Add the MCP tool endpoints as described above.
* These tools will now be accessible to all users, subject to individual activation in their chat sessions.

### Native Function Calling

OpenWebUI supports native function calling for tools:

* In the chat interface, go to **Chat Controls** > **Advanced Params**.
* Set the **Function Calling** parameter to `Native`.
* This enables more structured interactions between the AI model and the tools.

---

## 🧰 Additional Resources

* [OpenWebUI Documentation](https://docs.openwebui.com/)
* [ContextForge Documentation](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
* [OpenWebUI GitHub Repository](https://github.com/open-webui/open-webui)
* [ContextForge GitHub Repository](https://github.com/mcp-ecosystem/mcp-gateway)

---

By integrating MCP tools into OpenWebUI, you can enhance your AI assistant's capabilities, enabling it to perform a wider range of tasks by leveraging the diverse tools provided by the MCP ecosystem.
