mcp-servers/python/output_schema_test_server/README.md, before:

# Output Schema Test MCP Server

A test MCP server for validating outputSchema field support in the MCP Gateway.

## Purpose

This server demonstrates and tests the `outputSchema` field implementation (PR #1263) by providing tools with:
- **Structured output schemas** using Pydantic models
- **Complex nested structures** (lists, dicts, nested models)
- **Output validation** and error handling
- **Mixed output types** (typed models, dicts, simple strings)

## Features

### Tools with Output Schemas

1. **add_numbers** - Simple calculation with CalculationResult output
2. **multiply_numbers** - Multiplication with structured output
3. **divide_numbers** - Division with error handling in output
4. **create_user** - Complex nested structure (UserInfo model)
5. **validate_email** - Validation with ValidationResult output
6. **calculate_stats** - Dict-based output schema
7. **echo** - Simple string output (no schema for comparison)
8. **get_server_info** - Server capabilities information

### Output Schema Types

The server demonstrates three types of output schemas:

1. **Pydantic Models** (CalculationResult, UserInfo, ValidationResult)
   - Fully typed with field validation
   - Automatic JSON Schema generation
   - FastMCP converts these to outputSchema

2. **Dict Returns** (calculate_stats, get_server_info)
   - Flexible structure
   - No strict typing

3. **Simple Returns** (echo)
   - No output schema
   - For baseline comparison

## Installation

```bash
# From the server directory
make install

# Or with pip directly
pip install -e .
```

## Usage

### Run with stdio (for local testing)

```bash
make dev
```

### Run with HTTP

```bash
make serve-http
# Server runs on http://0.0.0.0:9100/mcp/
```

### Test the output schemas

```bash
# Start HTTP server first
make serve-http

# In another terminal, run tests
make test-tools
```

This will:
1. List all tools (showing outputSchema fields)
2. Call add_numbers and show structured output
3. Call create_user and show complex nested output

## Testing Output Schema Support

### 1. Register with MCP Gateway

```bash
# Add as a gateway peer
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/gateways \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "output-schema-test",
    "url": "http://localhost:9100/mcp/",
    "description": "Test server for output schemas",
    "auth_type": "none"
  }'
```

### 2. List tools from gateway

```bash
# Should show outputSchema field for each tool
curl http://localhost:4444/tools | jq '.[] | select(.name | contains("add_numbers"))'
```

Expected output should include:
```json
{
  "name": "add_numbers",
  "description": "Add two numbers and return a structured result with output schema",
  "inputSchema": {...},
  "outputSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "result": {"type": "number", "description": "The calculated result"},
      "operation": {"type": "string", "description": "The operation performed"},
      "operands": {"type": "array", "items": {"type": "number"}},
      "success": {"type": "boolean", "description": "Whether the calculation succeeded"}
    },
    "required": ["result", "operation", "operands", "success"]
  }
}
```

### 3. Invoke a tool

```bash
# Call add_numbers
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/tools/invoke \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "add_numbers",
    "arguments": {"a": 10, "b": 5}
  }'
```

Expected output:
```json
{
  "result": 15.0,
  "operation": "addition",
  "operands": [10.0, 5.0],
  "success": true
}
```

### 4. Test import/export

```bash
# Export tools (should include outputSchema)
curl http://localhost:4444/bulk/export > tools.json

# Check that output_schema is present
jq '.tools[] | select(.name == "add_numbers") | .output_schema' tools.json

# Re-import (should preserve outputSchema)
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/bulk/import \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d @tools.json
```

## Validation Checklist

Use this server to verify:

- [ ] outputSchema field appears in tools/list response
- [ ] outputSchema is stored in database
- [ ] outputSchema is included in tool export
- [ ] outputSchema is restored on import
- [ ] outputSchema is displayed in admin UI
- [ ] FastMCP Pydantic models generate correct schemas
- [ ] Dict returns work with and without schemas
- [ ] Tools without output schemas still work (echo)
- [ ] Complex nested schemas work (create_user)
- [ ] Validation schemas work (validate_email)

## MCP Client Configuration

### Claude Desktop

Add to `claude_desktop_config.json`:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "output-schema-test": {
      "command": "python",
      "args": ["-m", "output_schema_test_server.server_fastmcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### Via MCP Gateway

Register as a gateway peer (see Testing section above).

## Development

```bash
# Install with dev dependencies
make dev-install

# Format code
make format

# Run linters
make lint

# Run tests
make test

# Clean caches
make clean
```

## License

Apache-2.0

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

mcp-servers/python/output_schema_test_server/README.md, after:

# Output Schema Test MCP Server

A test MCP server for validating outputSchema field support in the ContextForge.

## Purpose

This server demonstrates and tests the `outputSchema` field implementation (PR #1263) by providing tools with:
- **Structured output schemas** using Pydantic models
- **Complex nested structures** (lists, dicts, nested models)
- **Output validation** and error handling
- **Mixed output types** (typed models, dicts, simple strings)

## Features

### Tools with Output Schemas

1. **add_numbers** - Simple calculation with CalculationResult output
2. **multiply_numbers** - Multiplication with structured output
3. **divide_numbers** - Division with error handling in output
4. **create_user** - Complex nested structure (UserInfo model)
5. **validate_email** - Validation with ValidationResult output
6. **calculate_stats** - Dict-based output schema
7. **echo** - Simple string output (no schema for comparison)
8. **get_server_info** - Server capabilities information

### Output Schema Types

The server demonstrates three types of output schemas:

1. **Pydantic Models** (CalculationResult, UserInfo, ValidationResult)
   - Fully typed with field validation
   - Automatic JSON Schema generation
   - FastMCP converts these to outputSchema

2. **Dict Returns** (calculate_stats, get_server_info)
   - Flexible structure
   - No strict typing

3. **Simple Returns** (echo)
   - No output schema
   - For baseline comparison

## Installation

```bash
# From the server directory
make install

# Or with pip directly
pip install -e .
```

## Usage

### Run with stdio (for local testing)

```bash
make dev
```

### Run with HTTP

```bash
make serve-http
# Server runs on http://0.0.0.0:9100/mcp/
```

### Test the output schemas

```bash
# Start HTTP server first
make serve-http

# In another terminal, run tests
make test-tools
```

This will:
1. List all tools (showing outputSchema fields)
2. Call add_numbers and show structured output
3. Call create_user and show complex nested output

## Testing Output Schema Support

### 1. Register with ContextForge

```bash
# Add as a gateway peer
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/gateways \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "output-schema-test",
    "url": "http://localhost:9100/mcp/",
    "description": "Test server for output schemas",
    "auth_type": "none"
  }'
```

### 2. List tools from gateway

```bash
# Should show outputSchema field for each tool
curl http://localhost:4444/tools | jq '.[] | select(.name | contains("add_numbers"))'
```

Expected output should include:
```json
{
  "name": "add_numbers",
  "description": "Add two numbers and return a structured result with output schema",
  "inputSchema": {...},
  "outputSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "result": {"type": "number", "description": "The calculated result"},
      "operation": {"type": "string", "description": "The operation performed"},
      "operands": {"type": "array", "items": {"type": "number"}},
      "success": {"type": "boolean", "description": "Whether the calculation succeeded"}
    },
    "required": ["result", "operation", "operands", "success"]
  }
}
```

### 3. Invoke a tool

```bash
# Call add_numbers
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/tools/invoke \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "add_numbers",
    "arguments": {"a": 10, "b": 5}
  }'
```

Expected output:
```json
{
  "result": 15.0,
  "operation": "addition",
  "operands": [10.0, 5.0],
  "success": true
}
```

### 4. Test import/export

```bash
# Export tools (should include outputSchema)
curl http://localhost:4444/bulk/export > tools.json

# Check that output_schema is present
jq '.tools[] | select(.name == "add_numbers") | .output_schema' tools.json

# Re-import (should preserve outputSchema)
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/bulk/import \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d @tools.json
```

## Validation Checklist

Use this server to verify:

- [ ] outputSchema field appears in tools/list response
- [ ] outputSchema is stored in database
- [ ] outputSchema is included in tool export
- [ ] outputSchema is restored on import
- [ ] outputSchema is displayed in admin UI
- [ ] FastMCP Pydantic models generate correct schemas
- [ ] Dict returns work with and without schemas
- [ ] Tools without output schemas still work (echo)
- [ ] Complex nested schemas work (create_user)
- [ ] Validation schemas work (validate_email)

## MCP Client Configuration

### Claude Desktop

Add to `claude_desktop_config.json`:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "output-schema-test": {
      "command": "python",
      "args": ["-m", "output_schema_test_server.server_fastmcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### Via ContextForge

Register as a gateway peer (see Testing section above).

## Development

```bash
# Install with dev dependencies
make dev-install

# Format code
make format

# Run linters
make lint

# Run tests
make test

# Clean caches
make clean
```

## License

Apache-2.0
