docs/docs/using/servers/go/calculator-server.md, before:

# Go Calculator Server

## Overview

A comprehensive **Go-based MCP server** for mathematical computations, implementing **13 mathematical tools** with advanced features and high precision calculations. This server provides everything from basic arithmetic to advanced financial modeling, statistical analysis, and unit conversions.

**Key Features:**

- 🧮 13 specialized mathematical tools
- 📊 Advanced statistical analysis
- 💰 Financial calculations (NPV, IRR, loans)
- 🔄 Multi-category unit conversions
- 📐 Expression evaluation with variables
- 🎯 High precision using decimal arithmetic
- ⚡ Sub-millisecond response times

## Quick Start

### Using with MCP Gateway

```bash
# Start the calculator server
cd mcp-servers/go/calculator-server
go build -o calculator-server ./cmd/server
./calculator-server -transport=stdio

# Or use HTTP transport
./calculator-server -transport=http -port=8081
```

### Integration with MCP Gateway

```bash
# Register with MCP Gateway (if using HTTP)
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/servers \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "calculator-server",
    "url": "http://localhost:8081/mcp",
    "transport": "http",
    "description": "Comprehensive mathematical computation server"
  }'
```

## Available Tools

### Basic Mathematical Tools (6 Tools)

#### 1. basic_math
Perform arithmetic operations with precision control.

**Operations:** add, subtract, multiply, divide

```json
{
  "tool": "basic_math",
  "arguments": {
    "operation": "add",
    "operands": [15.5, 20.3, 10.2],
    "precision": 2
  }
}
```

#### 2. advanced_math
Scientific mathematical functions including trigonometry and logarithms.

**Functions:** sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, atan, log, log10, ln, sqrt, abs, factorial, exp, pow

```json
{
  "tool": "advanced_math",
  "arguments": {
    "function": "pow",
    "value": 2,
    "exponent": 8
  }
}
```

#### 3. expression_eval
Evaluate complex mathematical expressions with variable substitution.

```json
{
  "tool": "expression_eval",
  "arguments": {
    "expression": "2 * pi * r",
    "variables": {
      "r": 5
    }
  }
}
```

#### 4. statistics
Perform statistical analysis on datasets.

**Operations:** mean, median, mode, std_dev, variance, percentile

```json
{
  "tool": "statistics",
  "arguments": {
    "data": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
    "operation": "mean"
  }
}
```

#### 5. unit_conversion
Convert between various measurement units.

**Categories:**

- **Length:** mm, cm, m, km, in, ft, yd, mi
- **Weight:** mg, g, kg, t, oz, lb, st, ton
- **Temperature:** C, F, K, R
- **Volume:** ml, cl, dl, l, kl, fl_oz, cup, pt, qt, gal
- **Area:** mm², cm², m², km², in², ft², yd², mi², acre, ha

```json
{
  "tool": "unit_conversion",
  "arguments": {
    "value": 100,
    "fromUnit": "cm",
    "toUnit": "m",
    "category": "length"
  }
}
```

#### 6. financial
Comprehensive financial calculations.

**Operations:** compound_interest, simple_interest, loan_payment, roi, present_value, future_value

```json
{
  "tool": "financial",
  "arguments": {
    "operation": "compound_interest",
    "principal": 10000,
    "rate": 5,
    "time": 3,
    "periods": 12
  }
}
```

### Advanced Specialized Tools (7 Tools)

#### 7. stats_summary
Get a comprehensive statistical summary of a dataset.

```json
{
  "tool": "stats_summary",
  "arguments": {
    "data": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
  }
}
```

#### 8. percentile
Calculate specific percentiles (0-100) for a dataset.

```json
{
  "tool": "percentile",
  "arguments": {
    "data": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
    "percentile": 90
  }
}
```

#### 9. batch_conversion
Convert multiple values between units at once.

```json
{
  "tool": "batch_conversion",
  "arguments": {
    "values": [100, 200, 300],
    "fromUnit": "cm",
    "toUnit": "m",
    "category": "length"
  }
}
```

#### 10. npv (Net Present Value)
Calculate NPV for investment analysis.

```json
{
  "tool": "npv",
  "arguments": {
    "cashFlows": [-50000, 15000, 20000, 25000, 30000],
    "discountRate": 8
  }
}
```

#### 11. irr (Internal Rate of Return)
Calculate IRR for investment performance evaluation.

```json
{
  "tool": "irr",
  "arguments": {
    "cashFlows": [-100000, 30000, 35000, 40000, 45000]
  }
}
```

#### 12. loan_comparison
Compare multiple loan scenarios.

```json
{
  "tool": "loan_comparison",
  "arguments": {
    "loans": [
      {"principal": 100000, "rate": 3.5, "time": 15},
      {"principal": 100000, "rate": 4.0, "time": 30}
    ]
  }
}
```

#### 13. investment_scenarios
Compare multiple investment options.

```json
{
  "tool": "investment_scenarios",
  "arguments": {
    "scenarios": [
      {"principal": 10000, "rate": 5, "time": 10},
      {"principal": 10000, "rate": 7, "time": 7}
    ]
  }
}
```

## Installation

### Prerequisites
- Go 1.21+
- Git

### Build from Source

```bash
# Clone and navigate to calculator server
cd mcp-servers/go/calculator-server

# Install dependencies
go mod download

# Build the server
go build -o calculator-server ./cmd/server

# Run the server
./calculator-server -transport=stdio
```

### Using Makefile

```bash
# Install dependencies
make deps

# Build for current platform
make build

# Run the server
make run

# Run tests
make test

# Check code quality
make quality
```

## Configuration

### Command Line Options

```bash
./calculator-server [OPTIONS]

Options:
  -transport string   Transport method (stdio, http) (default "stdio")
  -port int          Port for HTTP transport (default 8080)
  -host string       Host for HTTP transport (default "127.0.0.1")
  -config string     Path to configuration file (YAML or JSON)
```

### Configuration File

Create a `config.yaml`:

```yaml
server:
  transport: "http"
  http:
    host: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8081
    session_timeout: "5m"
    cors:
      enabled: true
      origins: ["http://localhost:3000"]

logging:
  level: "info"
  format: "json"

tools:
  precision:
    max_decimal_places: 15
    default_decimal_places: 2
  statistics:
    max_data_points: 10000
```

### Environment Variables

- `CALCULATOR_TRANSPORT`: Transport method (stdio, http)
- `CALCULATOR_HTTP_HOST`: HTTP server host
- `CALCULATOR_HTTP_PORT`: HTTP server port
- `CALCULATOR_LOG_LEVEL`: Logging level (debug, info, warn, error)

## HTTP Transport

The server supports MCP-compliant HTTP transport with SSE streaming:

```bash
# Start HTTP server
./calculator-server -transport=http -port=8081

# Make a request
curl -X POST http://localhost:8081/mcp \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "MCP-Protocol-Version: 2024-11-05" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "tools/call",
    "params": {
      "name": "basic_math",
      "arguments": {
        "operation": "add",
        "operands": [10, 20],
        "precision": 2
      }
    }
  }'
```

## Performance

- **Basic Operations:** ~1-5 μs per operation
- **Advanced Functions:** ~10-50 μs per operation
- **Expression Evaluation:** ~100-500 μs per expression
- **Statistical Operations:** ~10-100 μs per dataset
- **Financial Calculations:** ~50-200 μs per calculation
- **Memory Usage:** ~10-20 MB base, linear scaling with data

## Testing

```bash
# Run all tests
make test

# Run with coverage
make coverage

# Run benchmarks
make benchmark

# Run specific test suites
go test ./tests/basic_test.go -v
go test ./tests/advanced_test.go -v
```

## Mathematical Functions Reference

### Supported Functions
- **Trigonometric:** sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, atan
- **Logarithmic:** log (base 10), ln (natural), log10
- **Power/Root:** sqrt, pow, exp
- **Other:** abs, factorial

### Mathematical Constants
- `pi` - 3.14159...
- `e` - 2.71828...

## Unit Conversion Reference

### Quick Reference Table

| Category | Units | Example |
|----------|-------|---------|
| Length | mm, cm, m, km, in, ft, yd, mi | 100 cm → 1 m |
| Weight | mg, g, kg, t, oz, lb | 1000 g → 1 kg |
| Temperature | C, F, K, R | 0°C → 32°F |
| Volume | ml, l, gal, cup, pt, qt | 1000 ml → 1 l |
| Area | m², ft², acre, ha | 10000 m² → 1 ha |

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Server won't start:**
```bash
# Check if port is in use
lsof -i :8081

# Verify Go version
go version  # Should be 1.21+
```

**Build errors:**
```bash
# Clean and rebuild
make clean
make deps
make build
```

**Test failures:**
```bash
# Run verbose tests
go test -v ./...

# Check specific test
go test -run TestBasicMath -v
```

## Examples

### Financial Analysis Script

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Compare investment options

SERVER="http://localhost:8081/mcp"

# Calculate NPV for an investment
curl -X POST $SERVER \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "method": "tools/call",
    "params": {
      "name": "npv",
      "arguments": {
        "cashFlows": [-100000, 30000, 35000, 40000, 45000],
        "discountRate": 10
      }
    }
  }'
```

### Statistical Analysis

```python
import requests
import json

def analyze_dataset(data):
    """Get statistical summary of a dataset"""

    response = requests.post('http://localhost:8081/mcp',
        headers={'Content-Type': 'application/json'},
        json={
            "jsonrpc": "2.0",
            "id": 1,
            "method": "tools/call",
            "params": {
                "name": "stats_summary",
                "arguments": {
                    "data": data
                }
            }
        }
    )

    return response.json()

# Analyze sample data
result = analyze_dataset([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
print(json.dumps(result, indent=2))
```

## Related Resources

- [MCP Protocol Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
- [Go MCP SDK](https://github.com/mark3labs/mcp-go)
- [Calculator Server Source](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/tree/main/mcp-servers/go/calculator-server)

## License

Apache License 2.0

## Author

**Avinash Sangle**

- GitHub: [avisangle](https://github.com/avisangle)
- Website: [avisangle.github.io](https://avisangle.github.io/)

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

docs/docs/using/servers/go/calculator-server.md, after:

# Go Calculator Server

## Overview

A comprehensive **Go-based MCP server** for mathematical computations, implementing **13 mathematical tools** with advanced features and high precision calculations. This server provides everything from basic arithmetic to advanced financial modeling, statistical analysis, and unit conversions.

**Key Features:**

- 🧮 13 specialized mathematical tools
- 📊 Advanced statistical analysis
- 💰 Financial calculations (NPV, IRR, loans)
- 🔄 Multi-category unit conversions
- 📐 Expression evaluation with variables
- 🎯 High precision using decimal arithmetic
- ⚡ Sub-millisecond response times

## Quick Start

### Using with ContextForge

```bash
# Start the calculator server
cd mcp-servers/go/calculator-server
go build -o calculator-server ./cmd/server
./calculator-server -transport=stdio

# Or use HTTP transport
./calculator-server -transport=http -port=8081
```

### Integration with ContextForge

```bash
# Register with ContextForge (if using HTTP)
curl -X POST http://localhost:4444/servers \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "name": "calculator-server",
    "url": "http://localhost:8081/mcp",
    "transport": "http",
    "description": "Comprehensive mathematical computation server"
  }'
```

## Available Tools

### Basic Mathematical Tools (6 Tools)

#### 1. basic_math
Perform arithmetic operations with precision control.

**Operations:** add, subtract, multiply, divide

```json
{
  "tool": "basic_math",
  "arguments": {
    "operation": "add",
    "operands": [15.5, 20.3, 10.2],
    "precision": 2
  }
}
```

#### 2. advanced_math
Scientific mathematical functions including trigonometry and logarithms.

**Functions:** sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, atan, log, log10, ln, sqrt, abs, factorial, exp, pow

```json
{
  "tool": "advanced_math",
  "arguments": {
    "function": "pow",
    "value": 2,
    "exponent": 8
  }
}
```

#### 3. expression_eval
Evaluate complex mathematical expressions with variable substitution.

```json
{
  "tool": "expression_eval",
  "arguments": {
    "expression": "2 * pi * r",
    "variables": {
      "r": 5
    }
  }
}
```

#### 4. statistics
Perform statistical analysis on datasets.

**Operations:** mean, median, mode, std_dev, variance, percentile

```json
{
  "tool": "statistics",
  "arguments": {
    "data": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
    "operation": "mean"
  }
}
```

#### 5. unit_conversion
Convert between various measurement units.

**Categories:**

- **Length:** mm, cm, m, km, in, ft, yd, mi
- **Weight:** mg, g, kg, t, oz, lb, st, ton
- **Temperature:** C, F, K, R
- **Volume:** ml, cl, dl, l, kl, fl_oz, cup, pt, qt, gal
- **Area:** mm², cm², m², km², in², ft², yd², mi², acre, ha

```json
{
  "tool": "unit_conversion",
  "arguments": {
    "value": 100,
    "fromUnit": "cm",
    "toUnit": "m",
    "category": "length"
  }
}
```

#### 6. financial
Comprehensive financial calculations.

**Operations:** compound_interest, simple_interest, loan_payment, roi, present_value, future_value

```json
{
  "tool": "financial",
  "arguments": {
    "operation": "compound_interest",
    "principal": 10000,
    "rate": 5,
    "time": 3,
    "periods": 12
  }
}
```

### Advanced Specialized Tools (7 Tools)

#### 7. stats_summary
Get a comprehensive statistical summary of a dataset.

```json
{
  "tool": "stats_summary",
  "arguments": {
    "data": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
  }
}
```

#### 8. percentile
Calculate specific percentiles (0-100) for a dataset.

```json
{
  "tool": "percentile",
  "arguments": {
    "data": [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
    "percentile": 90
  }
}
```

#### 9. batch_conversion
Convert multiple values between units at once.

```json
{
  "tool": "batch_conversion",
  "arguments": {
    "values": [100, 200, 300],
    "fromUnit": "cm",
    "toUnit": "m",
    "category": "length"
  }
}
```

#### 10. npv (Net Present Value)
Calculate NPV for investment analysis.

```json
{
  "tool": "npv",
  "arguments": {
    "cashFlows": [-50000, 15000, 20000, 25000, 30000],
    "discountRate": 8
  }
}
```

#### 11. irr (Internal Rate of Return)
Calculate IRR for investment performance evaluation.

```json
{
  "tool": "irr",
  "arguments": {
    "cashFlows": [-100000, 30000, 35000, 40000, 45000]
  }
}
```

#### 12. loan_comparison
Compare multiple loan scenarios.

```json
{
  "tool": "loan_comparison",
  "arguments": {
    "loans": [
      {"principal": 100000, "rate": 3.5, "time": 15},
      {"principal": 100000, "rate": 4.0, "time": 30}
    ]
  }
}
```

#### 13. investment_scenarios
Compare multiple investment options.

```json
{
  "tool": "investment_scenarios",
  "arguments": {
    "scenarios": [
      {"principal": 10000, "rate": 5, "time": 10},
      {"principal": 10000, "rate": 7, "time": 7}
    ]
  }
}
```

## Installation

### Prerequisites
- Go 1.21+
- Git

### Build from Source

```bash
# Clone and navigate to calculator server
cd mcp-servers/go/calculator-server

# Install dependencies
go mod download

# Build the server
go build -o calculator-server ./cmd/server

# Run the server
./calculator-server -transport=stdio
```

### Using Makefile

```bash
# Install dependencies
make deps

# Build for current platform
make build

# Run the server
make run

# Run tests
make test

# Check code quality
make quality
```

## Configuration

### Command Line Options

```bash
./calculator-server [OPTIONS]

Options:
  -transport string   Transport method (stdio, http) (default "stdio")
  -port int          Port for HTTP transport (default 8080)
  -host string       Host for HTTP transport (default "127.0.0.1")
  -config string     Path to configuration file (YAML or JSON)
```

### Configuration File

Create a `config.yaml`:

```yaml
server:
  transport: "http"
  http:
    host: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8081
    session_timeout: "5m"
    cors:
      enabled: true
      origins: ["http://localhost:3000"]

logging:
  level: "info"
  format: "json"

tools:
  precision:
    max_decimal_places: 15
    default_decimal_places: 2
  statistics:
    max_data_points: 10000
```

### Environment Variables

- `CALCULATOR_TRANSPORT`: Transport method (stdio, http)
- `CALCULATOR_HTTP_HOST`: HTTP server host
- `CALCULATOR_HTTP_PORT`: HTTP server port
- `CALCULATOR_LOG_LEVEL`: Logging level (debug, info, warn, error)

## HTTP Transport

The server supports MCP-compliant HTTP transport with SSE streaming:

```bash
# Start HTTP server
./calculator-server -transport=http -port=8081

# Make a request
curl -X POST http://localhost:8081/mcp \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "MCP-Protocol-Version: 2024-11-05" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "id": 1,
    "method": "tools/call",
    "params": {
      "name": "basic_math",
      "arguments": {
        "operation": "add",
        "operands": [10, 20],
        "precision": 2
      }
    }
  }'
```

## Performance

- **Basic Operations:** ~1-5 μs per operation
- **Advanced Functions:** ~10-50 μs per operation
- **Expression Evaluation:** ~100-500 μs per expression
- **Statistical Operations:** ~10-100 μs per dataset
- **Financial Calculations:** ~50-200 μs per calculation
- **Memory Usage:** ~10-20 MB base, linear scaling with data

## Testing

```bash
# Run all tests
make test

# Run with coverage
make coverage

# Run benchmarks
make benchmark

# Run specific test suites
go test ./tests/basic_test.go -v
go test ./tests/advanced_test.go -v
```

## Mathematical Functions Reference

### Supported Functions
- **Trigonometric:** sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, atan
- **Logarithmic:** log (base 10), ln (natural), log10
- **Power/Root:** sqrt, pow, exp
- **Other:** abs, factorial

### Mathematical Constants
- `pi` - 3.14159...
- `e` - 2.71828...

## Unit Conversion Reference

### Quick Reference Table

| Category | Units | Example |
|----------|-------|---------|
| Length | mm, cm, m, km, in, ft, yd, mi | 100 cm → 1 m |
| Weight | mg, g, kg, t, oz, lb | 1000 g → 1 kg |
| Temperature | C, F, K, R | 0°C → 32°F |
| Volume | ml, l, gal, cup, pt, qt | 1000 ml → 1 l |
| Area | m², ft², acre, ha | 10000 m² → 1 ha |

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Server won't start:**
```bash
# Check if port is in use
lsof -i :8081

# Verify Go version
go version  # Should be 1.21+
```

**Build errors:**
```bash
# Clean and rebuild
make clean
make deps
make build
```

**Test failures:**
```bash
# Run verbose tests
go test -v ./...

# Check specific test
go test -run TestBasicMath -v
```

## Examples

### Financial Analysis Script

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# Compare investment options

SERVER="http://localhost:8081/mcp"

# Calculate NPV for an investment
curl -X POST $SERVER \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "method": "tools/call",
    "params": {
      "name": "npv",
      "arguments": {
        "cashFlows": [-100000, 30000, 35000, 40000, 45000],
        "discountRate": 10
      }
    }
  }'
```

### Statistical Analysis

```python
import requests
import json

def analyze_dataset(data):
    """Get statistical summary of a dataset"""

    response = requests.post('http://localhost:8081/mcp',
        headers={'Content-Type': 'application/json'},
        json={
            "jsonrpc": "2.0",
            "id": 1,
            "method": "tools/call",
            "params": {
                "name": "stats_summary",
                "arguments": {
                    "data": data
                }
            }
        }
    )

    return response.json()

# Analyze sample data
result = analyze_dataset([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
print(json.dumps(result, indent=2))
```

## Related Resources

- [MCP Protocol Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/)
- [Go MCP SDK](https://github.com/mark3labs/mcp-go)
- [Calculator Server Source](https://github.com/IBM/mcp-context-forge/tree/main/mcp-servers/go/calculator-server)

## License

Apache License 2.0

## Author

**Avinash Sangle**

- GitHub: [avisangle](https://github.com/avisangle)
- Website: [avisangle.github.io](https://avisangle.github.io/)
