plugins/pii_filter/README.md, before:

# PII Filter Plugin for MCP Gateway

> Author: Mihai Criveti
> Version: 0.1.0

A plugin for detecting and masking Personally Identifiable Information (PII) in MCP Gateway prompts and responses.

## Features

### PII Detection Types
- **Social Security Numbers (SSN)** - US format (123-45-6789 or 123456789)
- **Credit Card Numbers** - Major card formats with various separators
- **Email Addresses** - Standard email format validation
- **Phone Numbers** - US and international formats
- **IP Addresses** - IPv4 and IPv6
- **Dates of Birth** - Various date formats with context
- **Passport Numbers** - International passport formats
- **Driver's License Numbers** - US state formats
- **Bank Account Numbers** - Including IBAN
- **Medical Record Numbers** - MRN formats
- **AWS Access Keys** - AKIA prefixed keys and secrets
- **API Keys** - Generic API key patterns
- **Custom Patterns** - Define your own PII patterns

### Masking Strategies
- **REDACT** - Complete replacement with `[REDACTED]` or custom text
- **PARTIAL** - Show partial info (e.g., `***-**-1234` for SSN, `j***e@example.com` for email)
- **HASH** - Replace with hash value for consistency
- **TOKENIZE** - Replace with unique token for reversibility
- **REMOVE** - Complete removal of PII

### Operating Modes
- **ENFORCE** - Block or mask PII (based on configuration)
- **PERMISSIVE** - Log detections but don't block
- **DISABLED** - Turn off the plugin

## Installation

1. Copy .env.example .env
2. Enable plugins in `.env`
3. Add the plugin configuration to `plugins/config.yaml`:

```yaml
plugins:
  - name: "PIIFilterPlugin"
    kind: "plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter.PIIFilterPlugin"
    description: "Detects and masks Personally Identifiable Information"
    version: "1.0"
    author: "Security Team"
    hooks: ["prompt_pre_fetch", "prompt_post_fetch"]
    tags: ["security", "pii", "compliance", "filter", "gdpr", "hipaa"]
    mode: "enforce"  # enforce | permissive | disabled
    priority: 10  # Lower number = higher priority (runs first)
    conditions:
      - prompts: []  # Empty list = apply to all prompts
        server_ids: []  # Apply to all servers
        tenant_ids: []  # Apply to all tenants
    config:
      # PII Detection Settings
      detect_ssn: true
      detect_credit_card: true
      detect_email: true
      detect_phone: true
      detect_ip_address: true
      detect_aws_keys: true
      detect_api_keys: true
      # Masking Settings
      default_mask_strategy: "partial"
      redaction_text: "[PII_REDACTED]"
      # Behavior Settings
      block_on_detection: false
      log_detections: true
      include_detection_details: true
      # Whitelist patterns
      whitelist_patterns:
        - "test@example.com"
        - "555-555-5555"
```

## Configuration Examples

### Development Environment (Permissive)
```yaml
config:
  mode: "permissive"  # Only log, don't block
  detect_email: false  # Allow emails in dev
  detect_phone: false  # Allow phones in dev
  default_mask_strategy: "partial"  # Show partial info for debugging
  block_on_detection: false
```

### Production Environment (Strict Compliance)
```yaml
config:
  mode: "enforce"
  block_on_detection: true  # Block any request with PII
  default_mask_strategy: "redact"  # Complete redaction
  log_detections: true
  detect_ssn: true
  detect_credit_card: true
  detect_email: true
  # ... enable all detection types
```

### API Keys Only
```yaml
config:
  detect_ssn: false
  detect_credit_card: false
  detect_email: false
  detect_phone: false
  detect_aws_keys: true  # Only detect API keys
  detect_api_keys: true
  block_on_detection: true  # Always block if keys detected
  default_mask_strategy: "redact"
```

## Testing

### Run All Tests
```bash
# Run all PII filter tests
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py -v

# Run with coverage
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py --cov=plugins.pii_filter --cov-report=term-missing
```

### Run Specific Test Classes
```bash
# Test only the detector functionality
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIDetector -v

# Test only the plugin integration
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIFilterPlugin -v
```

### Run Individual Tests
```bash
# Test SSN detection
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIDetector::test_ssn_detection -v

# Test masking strategies
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIDetector::test_masking_strategies -v

# Test blocking mode
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIFilterPlugin::test_prompt_pre_fetch_blocking -v
```

### Manual Testing with the Gateway

1. Enable the plugin in your `.env`:
```bash
PLUGINS_ENABLED=true
```

2. Start the gateway:
```bash
python -m mcpgateway.main
```

3. Test with curl:
```bash
# Test PII detection in prompt arguments
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/prompts/test_prompt \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "args": {
      "user_input": "My SSN is 123-45-6789 and email is john@example.com"
    }
  }'

# Response should have masked PII:
# "user_input": "My SSN is ***-**-6789 and email is j***n@example.com"
```

### Test Custom Patterns

Add custom patterns in your config:
```yaml
config:
  custom_patterns:
    - type: "custom"
      pattern: "\\bEMP\\d{6}\\b"
      description: "Employee ID"
      mask_strategy: "redact"
      enabled: true
```

Test the custom pattern:
```python
from plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter import PIIFilterPlugin, PIIFilterConfig, PIIDetector

config = PIIFilterConfig(
    custom_patterns=[{
        "type": "custom",
        "pattern": r"\bEMP\d{6}\b",
        "description": "Employee ID",
        "mask_strategy": "redact",
        "enabled": True
    }]
)
detector = PIIDetector(config)

text = "Employee ID: EMP123456"
detections = detector.detect(text)
masked = detector.mask(text, detections)
print(masked)  # Output: "Employee ID: [REDACTED]"
```

## Debugging

### Enable Debug Logging
```python
import logging
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)

# The plugin will log all PII detections
logger = logging.getLogger("plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter")
logger.setLevel(logging.DEBUG)
```

### Check Detection Results
```python
from plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter import PIIDetector, PIIFilterConfig

config = PIIFilterConfig(detect_ssn=True, detect_email=True)
detector = PIIDetector(config)

text = "SSN: 123-45-6789, Email: test@example.com"
detections = detector.detect(text)

# Inspect what was detected
for pii_type, items in detections.items():
    print(f"Type: {pii_type}")
    for item in items:
        print(f"  - Value: {item['value']}")
        print(f"  - Position: {item['start']}-{item['end']}")
        print(f"  - Strategy: {item['mask_strategy']}")
```

## Common Issues and Solutions

### Issue: PII not being detected
**Solution**: Check that the specific detection type is enabled in config:
```yaml
config:
  detect_ssn: true  # Make sure this is true
  detect_email: true
```

### Issue: False positives (detecting non-PII)
**Solution**: Use whitelist patterns:
```yaml
config:
  whitelist_patterns:
    - "test@example.com"
    - "555-555-5555"
    - "000-00-0000"
```

### Issue: Overlapping detections
**Solution**: The plugin automatically handles overlapping patterns by keeping only the first match. If you need different behavior, adjust pattern priorities or use custom patterns.

### Issue: Plugin not running
**Solution**: Verify:
1. `PLUGINS_ENABLED=true` in `.env`
2. Plugin priority is set correctly (lower number = runs first)
3. Plugin mode is not set to "disabled"
4. Conditions match your prompts/servers

## Performance Considerations

- **Pattern Compilation**: Patterns are compiled once during initialization
- **Detection Speed**: O(n*m) where n = text length, m = number of patterns
- **Memory Usage**: Minimal - only stores compiled patterns and current detections
- **Caching**: No caching by default (stateless detection)

## Security Best Practices

1. **Production Settings**:
   - Always use `mode: "enforce"` in production
   - Enable `block_on_detection: true` for sensitive environments
   - Use `default_mask_strategy: "redact"` for complete removal

2. **Logging**:
   - Enable `log_detections: true` for audit trails
   - Monitor logs for PII detection patterns
   - Never log the actual PII values

3. **Testing**:
   - Test with realistic data patterns
   - Verify whitelist patterns don't expose real PII
   - Regularly update patterns for new PII formats


## Sample Prompt

Here's a prompt that trips the checks:

```text
Personal Info:
SSN: 123-45-6789 or 987654321
Email: john@example.com
Phone: (555) 123-4567 or +1-800-555-0199
DOB: 01/15/1985
```

## CURL Command to Test

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)

# Then test with a prompt containing various PII
curl -X GET "http://localhost:4444/prompts/test_prompt" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "arguments": {
      "user_input": "My SSN is 123-45-6789 and email is john@example.com. Credit card: 4111-1111-1111-1111, phone (555) 123-4567. Server IP: 192.168.1.1, AWS Key: AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE"
    }
  }'
```

## Contributing

To add new PII detection patterns:

1. Add the pattern to `_compile_patterns()` method:
```python
if self.config.detect_my_pattern:
    patterns.append(PIIPattern(
        type=PIIType.MY_PATTERN,
        pattern=r'your-regex-here',
        description="Description",
        mask_strategy=MaskingStrategy.REDACT
    ))
```

2. Add configuration option to `PIIFilterConfig`:
```python
detect_my_pattern: bool = Field(default=True, description="Detect my pattern")
```

3. Add tests to verify detection and masking

## License

Apache-2.0

## Support

For issues or questions, please open an issue in the MCP Gateway repository.

Commit message:

docs: rebrand to ContextForge AI Gateway consistently across the project
Unify all product naming from the inconsistent mix of "MCP Gateway",
"Context Forge", "MCP Context Forge", and "ContextForge MCP Gateway"
to consistently use "ContextForge" (or "ContextForge AI Gateway" for
the full product name).

Updated positioning to reflect all supported gateway patterns:
- Tools Gateway (MCP, REST, gRPC, TOON)
- Agent Gateway (A2A, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- Model Gateway (LLM proxy, OpenAI API spec, 8+ providers)
- API Gateway (rate limiting, auth, retries, reverse proxy)
- Plugin Extensibility (40+ plugins)
- Observability (OpenTelemetry)

Preserved all code identifiers: mcpgateway (Python module),
mcp-contextforge-gateway (PyPI), mcp-context-forge (GitHub/Docker),
MCPGATEWAY_* (env vars), mcpContextForge (Helm), mcp.db (database).

Closes #2714

Signed-off-by: Mihai Criveti <crivetimihai@gmail.com>

plugins/pii_filter/README.md, after:

# PII Filter Plugin for ContextForge

> Author: Mihai Criveti
> Version: 0.1.0

A plugin for detecting and masking Personally Identifiable Information (PII) in ContextForge prompts and responses.

## Features

### PII Detection Types
- **Social Security Numbers (SSN)** - US format (123-45-6789 or 123456789)
- **Credit Card Numbers** - Major card formats with various separators
- **Email Addresses** - Standard email format validation
- **Phone Numbers** - US and international formats
- **IP Addresses** - IPv4 and IPv6
- **Dates of Birth** - Various date formats with context
- **Passport Numbers** - International passport formats
- **Driver's License Numbers** - US state formats
- **Bank Account Numbers** - Including IBAN
- **Medical Record Numbers** - MRN formats
- **AWS Access Keys** - AKIA prefixed keys and secrets
- **API Keys** - Generic API key patterns
- **Custom Patterns** - Define your own PII patterns

### Masking Strategies
- **REDACT** - Complete replacement with `[REDACTED]` or custom text
- **PARTIAL** - Show partial info (e.g., `***-**-1234` for SSN, `j***e@example.com` for email)
- **HASH** - Replace with hash value for consistency
- **TOKENIZE** - Replace with unique token for reversibility
- **REMOVE** - Complete removal of PII

### Operating Modes
- **ENFORCE** - Block or mask PII (based on configuration)
- **PERMISSIVE** - Log detections but don't block
- **DISABLED** - Turn off the plugin

## Installation

1. Copy .env.example .env
2. Enable plugins in `.env`
3. Add the plugin configuration to `plugins/config.yaml`:

```yaml
plugins:
  - name: "PIIFilterPlugin"
    kind: "plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter.PIIFilterPlugin"
    description: "Detects and masks Personally Identifiable Information"
    version: "1.0"
    author: "Security Team"
    hooks: ["prompt_pre_fetch", "prompt_post_fetch"]
    tags: ["security", "pii", "compliance", "filter", "gdpr", "hipaa"]
    mode: "enforce"  # enforce | permissive | disabled
    priority: 10  # Lower number = higher priority (runs first)
    conditions:
      - prompts: []  # Empty list = apply to all prompts
        server_ids: []  # Apply to all servers
        tenant_ids: []  # Apply to all tenants
    config:
      # PII Detection Settings
      detect_ssn: true
      detect_credit_card: true
      detect_email: true
      detect_phone: true
      detect_ip_address: true
      detect_aws_keys: true
      detect_api_keys: true
      # Masking Settings
      default_mask_strategy: "partial"
      redaction_text: "[PII_REDACTED]"
      # Behavior Settings
      block_on_detection: false
      log_detections: true
      include_detection_details: true
      # Whitelist patterns
      whitelist_patterns:
        - "test@example.com"
        - "555-555-5555"
```

## Configuration Examples

### Development Environment (Permissive)
```yaml
config:
  mode: "permissive"  # Only log, don't block
  detect_email: false  # Allow emails in dev
  detect_phone: false  # Allow phones in dev
  default_mask_strategy: "partial"  # Show partial info for debugging
  block_on_detection: false
```

### Production Environment (Strict Compliance)
```yaml
config:
  mode: "enforce"
  block_on_detection: true  # Block any request with PII
  default_mask_strategy: "redact"  # Complete redaction
  log_detections: true
  detect_ssn: true
  detect_credit_card: true
  detect_email: true
  # ... enable all detection types
```

### API Keys Only
```yaml
config:
  detect_ssn: false
  detect_credit_card: false
  detect_email: false
  detect_phone: false
  detect_aws_keys: true  # Only detect API keys
  detect_api_keys: true
  block_on_detection: true  # Always block if keys detected
  default_mask_strategy: "redact"
```

## Testing

### Run All Tests
```bash
# Run all PII filter tests
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py -v

# Run with coverage
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py --cov=plugins.pii_filter --cov-report=term-missing
```

### Run Specific Test Classes
```bash
# Test only the detector functionality
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIDetector -v

# Test only the plugin integration
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIFilterPlugin -v
```

### Run Individual Tests
```bash
# Test SSN detection
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIDetector::test_ssn_detection -v

# Test masking strategies
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIDetector::test_masking_strategies -v

# Test blocking mode
pytest tests/unit/mcpgateway/plugins/pii_filter/test_pii_filter.py::TestPIIFilterPlugin::test_prompt_pre_fetch_blocking -v
```

### Manual Testing with the Gateway

1. Enable the plugin in your `.env`:
```bash
PLUGINS_ENABLED=true
```

2. Start the gateway:
```bash
python -m mcpgateway.main
```

3. Test with curl:
```bash
# Test PII detection in prompt arguments
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/prompts/test_prompt \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "args": {
      "user_input": "My SSN is 123-45-6789 and email is john@example.com"
    }
  }'

# Response should have masked PII:
# "user_input": "My SSN is ***-**-6789 and email is j***n@example.com"
```

### Test Custom Patterns

Add custom patterns in your config:
```yaml
config:
  custom_patterns:
    - type: "custom"
      pattern: "\\bEMP\\d{6}\\b"
      description: "Employee ID"
      mask_strategy: "redact"
      enabled: true
```

Test the custom pattern:
```python
from plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter import PIIFilterPlugin, PIIFilterConfig, PIIDetector

config = PIIFilterConfig(
    custom_patterns=[{
        "type": "custom",
        "pattern": r"\bEMP\d{6}\b",
        "description": "Employee ID",
        "mask_strategy": "redact",
        "enabled": True
    }]
)
detector = PIIDetector(config)

text = "Employee ID: EMP123456"
detections = detector.detect(text)
masked = detector.mask(text, detections)
print(masked)  # Output: "Employee ID: [REDACTED]"
```

## Debugging

### Enable Debug Logging
```python
import logging
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)

# The plugin will log all PII detections
logger = logging.getLogger("plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter")
logger.setLevel(logging.DEBUG)
```

### Check Detection Results
```python
from plugins.pii_filter.pii_filter import PIIDetector, PIIFilterConfig

config = PIIFilterConfig(detect_ssn=True, detect_email=True)
detector = PIIDetector(config)

text = "SSN: 123-45-6789, Email: test@example.com"
detections = detector.detect(text)

# Inspect what was detected
for pii_type, items in detections.items():
    print(f"Type: {pii_type}")
    for item in items:
        print(f"  - Value: {item['value']}")
        print(f"  - Position: {item['start']}-{item['end']}")
        print(f"  - Strategy: {item['mask_strategy']}")
```

## Common Issues and Solutions

### Issue: PII not being detected
**Solution**: Check that the specific detection type is enabled in config:
```yaml
config:
  detect_ssn: true  # Make sure this is true
  detect_email: true
```

### Issue: False positives (detecting non-PII)
**Solution**: Use whitelist patterns:
```yaml
config:
  whitelist_patterns:
    - "test@example.com"
    - "555-555-5555"
    - "000-00-0000"
```

### Issue: Overlapping detections
**Solution**: The plugin automatically handles overlapping patterns by keeping only the first match. If you need different behavior, adjust pattern priorities or use custom patterns.

### Issue: Plugin not running
**Solution**: Verify:
1. `PLUGINS_ENABLED=true` in `.env`
2. Plugin priority is set correctly (lower number = runs first)
3. Plugin mode is not set to "disabled"
4. Conditions match your prompts/servers

## Performance Considerations

- **Pattern Compilation**: Patterns are compiled once during initialization
- **Detection Speed**: O(n*m) where n = text length, m = number of patterns
- **Memory Usage**: Minimal - only stores compiled patterns and current detections
- **Caching**: No caching by default (stateless detection)

## Security Best Practices

1. **Production Settings**:
   - Always use `mode: "enforce"` in production
   - Enable `block_on_detection: true` for sensitive environments
   - Use `default_mask_strategy: "redact"` for complete removal

2. **Logging**:
   - Enable `log_detections: true` for audit trails
   - Monitor logs for PII detection patterns
   - Never log the actual PII values

3. **Testing**:
   - Test with realistic data patterns
   - Verify whitelist patterns don't expose real PII
   - Regularly update patterns for new PII formats


## Sample Prompt

Here's a prompt that trips the checks:

```text
Personal Info:
SSN: 123-45-6789 or 987654321
Email: john@example.com
Phone: (555) 123-4567 or +1-800-555-0199
DOB: 01/15/1985
```

## CURL Command to Test

```bash
export MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN=$(python3 -m mcpgateway.utils.create_jwt_token -u admin@example.com --secret my-test-key)

# Then test with a prompt containing various PII
curl -X GET "http://localhost:4444/prompts/test_prompt" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $MCPGATEWAY_BEARER_TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "arguments": {
      "user_input": "My SSN is 123-45-6789 and email is john@example.com. Credit card: 4111-1111-1111-1111, phone (555) 123-4567. Server IP: 192.168.1.1, AWS Key: AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE"
    }
  }'
```

## Contributing

To add new PII detection patterns:

1. Add the pattern to `_compile_patterns()` method:
```python
if self.config.detect_my_pattern:
    patterns.append(PIIPattern(
        type=PIIType.MY_PATTERN,
        pattern=r'your-regex-here',
        description="Description",
        mask_strategy=MaskingStrategy.REDACT
    ))
```

2. Add configuration option to `PIIFilterConfig`:
```python
detect_my_pattern: bool = Field(default=True, description="Detect my pattern")
```

3. Add tests to verify detection and masking

## License

Apache-2.0

## Support

For issues or questions, please open an issue in the ContextForge repository.
